--- PAGE 1 ---
IAS
Interconnected 
Automation Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Siegen University
Chair of Interconnected Automation Systems
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Oliver WallscheidDipl -Ing. Konstantin Wrede
Master Thesis
Evaluation of a Pipeline to generate
Deep Learning Agents for Fine
Motoric Motion Tasks in the
Domain of Serial Manipulators
by
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
Student ID: 1700969
Supervisor: Prof. Dr.-Ing. Oliver Wallscheid
External Supervisor: Dipl -Ing. Konstantin Wrede
Thesis Nr.: MA_004
Filing Date: July 29, 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
Declaration of Authorship
Ich versichere, dass ich die schriftliche Ausarbeitung selbständig angefertigt und keine
anderen als die angegebenen Hilfsmittel benutzt habe. Alle Stellen, die dem Wortlaut oder
dem Sinn nach (inkl. Übersetzungen) anderen Werken entnommen sind, habe ich in jedem
einzelnen Fall unter genauer Angabe der Quelle (einschließlich des World Wide Web sowie
generativer KI und anderer elektronischer Datensammlungen) deutlich als Entlehnung
kenntlich gemacht. Dies gilt auch für angefügte Zeichnungen, bildliche Darstellungen,
Skizzen und dergleichen. Ich nehme zur Kenntnis, dass die nachgewiesene Unterlassung
der Herkunftsangabe als versuchte Täuschung gewertet wird.
Ich bestätige, dass die
elektronische Version inhaltlich mit der gedruckten Version übereinstimmt.
Siegen,
(Datum)
(Unterschrift)
I certify that I have prepared this written work independently and have not used any
aids other than those speciﬁed. I have clearly identiﬁed all passages that are taken from
other works in terms of wording or meaning (including translations) as borrowed material
in each individual case, stating the exact source (including the World Wide Web as well
as generative AI and other electronic data collections).
This also applies to attached
drawings, pictorial representations, sketches and the like. I acknowledge that the proven
omission of the indication of origin will be regarded as attempted deception. I conﬁrm
that the content of the electronic version is the same as the printed version.
Siegen,
(Date)
(Signature)
31.07.2025
31.07.2025

--- PAGE 3 ---
Abstract
This thesis explores a learning pipeline that trains robotic agents using imitation learning
and imitation-bootstrapped reinforcement learning to perform contact-rich manipulation
tasks. While imitation learning provides sample-e!cient policy initialization from expert
demonstrations, it often lacks robustness in unseen situations. Reinforcement learning,
on the other hand, provides better generalization due to parallel training but requires ex-
tensive interaction time and a well-shaped reward function, making it impractical for real-
world training from scratch. To address these limitations, the thesis evaluates a pipeline
in which expert demonstrations are ﬁrst collected in a simulation environment to train
the imitation learning agent. This trained imitation learning agent is then used to initial-
ize the policy weights for reinforcement learning training. Additional demonstrations are
synthetically augmented to enhance data diversity. The trained model in simulation is
validated on national institute of standard and Technology (NIST) and RoboEval bench-
marks. Manipulation tasks peg-insertion and plugsocket-insertion are used to validate the
results, which demonstrate that the combined approach of imitation learning + reinforce-
ment learning improves the performance of the agent. This work highlights the potential
of hybrid learning strategies for robotic skill acquisition.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to everyone who supported me throughout
the course of this master’s thesis project.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my academic supervisor, Prof. Dr.-Ing. Oliver
Wallscheid, for his invaluable guidance during this thesis. His constructive feedback
during the intermediate results presentation helped shape the direction of this work. His
thoughtful counter-questions on the observation space were particularly instrumental in
helping me reﬁne the objectives of the thesis.
I am deeply grateful to my external supervisor, Dipl.-Ing.
Konstantin Wrede, as
well as to M.Sc. Yibo Di, for their excellent guidance and mentorship throughout the
project. Their practical insights, extended discussions, and generous knowledge sharing
were crucial in helping me gain a deep understanding of the subject.
I thank them
for always asking the right questions and for consistently encouraging me to push my
limits.
My appreciation also goes to the entire Adaptive Robotics team at Fraunhofer IIS,
and to the group head Mr. Ron Martin, for their continuous support and assistance in
the laboratory. A very special thanks to my friends at the institute for their camaraderie
and support.
A special thanks to my sister for her support and encouragement during my studies.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for their unwavering encouragement,
patience, and moral support throughout my academic journey.
This thesis would not have been possible without the contributions and support of all
these individuals.
Siegen, July 29, 2025
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
i

--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents
Acknowledgement
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1 Structure of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the Art and Related Work
3
2.1 Imitation learning for robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2 Reinforcement learning for robotics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3 Simulation to reality transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4 Selection of Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
15
3.1 Workﬂow overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2 Demonstration collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3 Synthetic data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1 Data annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2 Data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4 Imitation learning model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5 Reinforcement learning model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6 Simulation to reality transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6.1 Pytorch deployment framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Policy Network Architecture
27
5
Simulation Setup
29
5.1 Scene setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2 Actuation and Control Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3 Training environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.1 Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.2 Actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.3 Rewards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3.4 Terminations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4 Sim2Real consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.1 Domain Randomization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.2 Noise Injection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
ii

--- PAGE 6 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
6
Real-world Setup
46
6.1 Perception pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2 Task Plugins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3 Sim2Real Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Results
52
7.0.1 Performance on NIST Assembly Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.0.2 Performance on RoboEval benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
Conclusion
61
8.1 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Lists
64
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Appendix
74
A.1 Real-World End-E"ector Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.2 Performance on RoboEval metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.3 LSTM Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.4 Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.5 Keypoint Reward Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
iii

--- PAGE 7 ---
1 Introduction
Automatic robotic assembly has posed signiﬁcant challenges to the manufacturing indus-
try. Traditional methods like PTP (point-to-point) robot programming have been widely
adopted for industrial automation. However, these methods lack ﬂexibility and adapt-
ability in dynamic environments. Moreover, it is di!cult to generalize across similar but
slightly varied tasks. Classical control loops often require manual tuning and precise cal-
ibration, especially for contact-rich tasks like insertion, which demand high precision and
accuracy. These limitations can be overcome through the use of ML (Machine Learn-
ing) techniques such as imitation learning (IL) and reinforcement learning (RL) [1] [2]
[3]. Imitation Learning (IL) refers to the process of learning a policy by mimicking ex-
pert demonstrations, typically via supervised learning. Reinforcement Learning (RL),
in contrast, involves learning optimal actions by maximizing cumulative reward through
interaction with the environment.
In recent years, the use of IL and RL to perform ﬁne motoric motion tasks has grown
rapidly, with companies like Nvidia leading the race [4]. However, contact-rich manipu-
lation tasks remain a challenging problem due to the complexity of accurately modeling
contact dynamics and achieving robust generalization. A key bottleneck in deploying
such policies on real robots is the simulation-to-real (sim-to-real) transfer problem, where
discrepancies between the simulated and real-world environments—such as unmodeled
friction, sensor noise, or slight hardware inaccuracies can lead to poor real-world perfor-
mance of policies trained purely in simulation.
To address these limitations, this work presents a hybrid approach that combines im-
itation learning and reinforcement learning (IL+RL) to leverage the strengths of both
methods. First, expert demonstrations are collected in a simulation environment to train
an imitation learning policy. This is achieved using the teleoperation capabilities of Isaac
Lab. Isaac Lab, which is built on Isaac Sim—a physics simulator capable of running
multiple parallel environments on the graphics processing unit (GPU)—enables e!cient
training of robotic agents using both IL and RL. To enhance the diversity and robustness
of the training data, the initial demonstrations are further augmented using MimicGen
(RoboMimic).
The trained IL policy is then used to initialize the policy weights for
reinforcement learning, allowing the agent to reﬁne its behavior through trial-and-error
interaction with the environment. Finetuned RL policy is deployed in the real world to
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
evaluate its performance under real-world conditions and assess the e"ectiveness of the
sim-to-real transfer.
The learned policies are evaluated in simulation using standardized benchmark metrics
and tested in the real world to study simulation-to-real transferability. The models were
assessed using success-based and trajectory-based metrics inspired by the NIST assem-
bly benchmark and RoboEval framework. These include engagement rate, success rate,
joint and Cartesian path length, as well as joint and Cartesian jerk. Such metrics allow
comparison of di"erent policies in terms of both task completion and motion smoothness.
In addition, real-world validation was conducted to examine how well policies trained
entirely in simulation transfer to real-world scenarios.
1.1 Structure of work
The structure of this thesis is as follows:
Chapter 2 provides a brief overview of existing deep learning pipelines for robotic assem-
bly tasks, including traditional imitation learning and reinforcement learning algorithms,
methods, and experiments. It also introduces the two assembly tasks selected for this work
and highlights their limitations, laying the groundwork for the proposed approach.
Chapter 3 details the methodology used in this thesis, covering the learning pipeline,
observation spaces, and training strategies.
Chapter 4 presents the neural network architecture and introduces key hyperparameters
relevant to policy training.
Chapters 5 and 6 describe the simulation setup and real-world deployment, respectively.
These chapters discuss the simulation environment, simulation-to-reality considerations,
and the identiﬁed sim-to-real gaps.
Chapter 7 interprets the outcomes of the experiments and evaluates policy performance
across di"erent benchmarks.
Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the thesis with key insights and outlines directions for future
work.
2

--- PAGE 9 ---
2 State of the Art and Related
Work
2.1 Imitation learning for robotics
Imitation learning is a method of supervised machine learning which enables robots to
acquire skills by mimicking expert demonstrations[6][7]. The paradigm, also known as
learning from demonstrations (LfD), has been applied in the domains of autonomous
driving and robotics manipulation. IL is appealing for contact-rich ﬁne motoric tasks like
peg insertion and screwing[8]. The idea is to provide examples of desired behaviour to an
agent by the expert (a human or a classical controller), allowing the agent to generalize
and reproduce the behavior in similar scenarios. The need for the robot to autonomously
discover a feasible policy is not required. The concept of Learning from demonstrations
gained traction in robotics as an alternative to manual robot programming due to its
potential to generalize across di"erent tasks.
The objective of IL is to minimize the di"erence between the agent’s action and the
expert’s action [9]:
LIL(ω) = E(s,a→)→D [ε (ϑω(s), a↑)]
(2.1)
where[9]:
• (s, a↑) are state-action pairs from expert demonstrations.
• ϑω(s) is the agent’s action prediction.
• L(·, ·) is a loss function, e.g., mean squared error or cross-entropy.
• D is the dataset of expert demonstrations.
Early pioneer work by Atkeson and Schaal showed the way a robot can learn tasks like
pendulum swing-up from a single human demonstration[7]. This can be done by extracting
an implicit goal from the example and then improving through practice. Previous work
showed the ALVINN system by Pomerleau which demonstrated the recording and training
3

--- PAGE 10 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
of a supervised model to mimic autonomous driving [9]. This ALVINN system showed
one of the ﬁrst early successes of Behavior cloning (BC).
BC is a process where a policy learns to directly map the states to expert actions using
a supervised approach [10]:
LBC(ω) = →1
|D|
!
(s,a)↓D
log ϑω(a | s).
(2.2)
Here, D = {(s, a)} is the expert state-action dataset and ϑω(a | s) is the policy’s probabil-
ity of action a in state s. Minimizing LBC maximizes the likelihood of the demonstrated
actions, driving the policy to imitate the expert. Despite its simplicity, BC su"ers from
covariate shift—small errors compound, leading the learner into unfamiliar states.
In the early 2000s, an approach of inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) was introduced
as a way to address the limitations of imitation learning. IRL focused on optimizing the
reward function [11]. IRL methods enabled robots to internalize the intent behind demon-
strations, rather than merely cloning actions. The key insight is that by learning a reward
function that the expert appears to maximize, a policy can be derived that potentially
generalizes better than direct behavior cloning. Building upon this idea, Abbeel and Ng
introduced apprenticeship learning via IRL [12]. The authors ﬁrst used IRL to infer a
reward that the expert was implicitly optimizing, then tried RL to ﬁnd a policy which is
as good as the expert.
Returning to covariate shift, a paper published in 2011 by Ross et al. on Dataset Aggrega-
tion (DAgger) [10] addressed the problem and provided an e!cient solution. In DAgger,
the robot’s current policy is run to generate trajectories, while the expert provides cor-
rective actions for the states visited [10].
D1 = Dexpert,
Dk+1 = Dk ↑{(st, a↑
t)},
ωk+1 = arg min
ω
!
(s,a)↓Dk+1
ε
"
ϑω(s), a
#
.
(2.3)
Here, Dk is the dataset at iteration k, a↑
t are expert labels for the learner’s visited states
st, and ε is a supervised loss (e.g. negative log-likelihood). By aggregating expert correc-
tions on the learner’s state distribution, DAgger eliminates covariate shift and stabilizes
training[10].
In the context of industrial and collaborative robots (also known as co-bots, that can
be safely guided by experts), IL o"ers a data-e!cient route to learning—especially when
precise trajectories are easier to demonstrate than to hard-code or learn via pure reinforce-
ment learning. A research conducted by Sagar Gubbi et al. on imitation learning for high
precision tasks showed the peg-insertion task with GAIL [3]. A similar previous research
conducted by Fares J. Abu-Dakka on solving peg-in-hole tasks by human demonstration
4

--- PAGE 11 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
and exception strategy [13] achieved the task completion by acquiring forces and torques
on top of the trajectories.
Although large scale datasets for grasping were already published [14][15], acquiring data
for contact-rich tasks by hand was still tedious and lengthy. To mitigate this problem,
synthetic data generation using imitation learning [16] was introduced by a research team
at NVIDIA. This paper provided a brief introduction on how to generate synthetic data in
simulation via imitation learning. The generated data then can be used to train imitation
learning models to achieve more generalization and data distribution. A follow-up work on
synthetic data generation for robot learning, MimicGen [17], was introduced in 2023 which
generated over 50 thousand demonstrations for 18 tasks with diverse scene conﬁgurations.
The paper further discussed the e"ectiveness and utility of MimicGen over manual demo
collection. It showed an economical approach towards scaling up robot learning.
Numerous surveys has already been published on imitation learning. Some of them include
a survey by Tsuji et al. [8] on imitation learning for contact-rich manipuation tasks and
Zare et al. [18] on algorithms, recent developments and challenges.
In relation to the scope of this thesis, a recent study at Stanford University in 2024
elaborated the use of imitation learning to bootstrap reinforcement learning for better and
faster convergence. The imitation-bootstrapped reinforcement learning [19] was evaluated
on 6 simulation and 3 real-world tasks where it outperformed prior methods.
2.2 Reinforcement learning for robotics
While imitation learning relies on external demonstrations, RL enables robots to au-
tonomously learn skills through trial-and-error interactions with the environment. The
agent explores actions and receives rewards as feedback, based on which the policy is
gradually improved. In robotics, due to continuous state/action spaces, RL presents a
great challenge. Moreover, the risk of unsafe actions and impractically slow exploration
on physical hardware makes it harder to implement [20]. In robotics, RL promises au-
tonomous acquisition of control strategies for tasks such as ﬁne assembly, manipulation,
and locomotion, without manually crafting controllers. The goal in reinforcement learning
is to maximize the expected return[21]:
J(ϑω) = Eε→p(ε|ϑω)
$ ↔
!
t=0
ϖtr(st, at)
%
(2.4)
where:
• ϑω(at | st) is the parameterized policy.
• ϱ = (s0, a0, s1, a1, . . .) is the trajectory.
• r(st, at) is the reward at time t.
5

--- PAGE 12 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
• ϖ ↓[0, 1] is the discount factor.
Early work in continuous-control RL introduced the idea of directly parameterizing a
stochastic policy ϑω(a | s) and updating its parameters by gradient ascent on an expected
discounted return[21].
J(ω) = Eε→ϑω
& ↔
!
t=0
ϖt r(st, at)
'
,
(2.5)
where ϖ ↓(0, 1) is the discount factor. Williams’s REINFORCE algorithm (1992) [22]
provided a Monte Carlo estimator of the gradient,
↔ωJ(ω) = Eε
& ↔
!
t=0
↔ω log ϑω(at | st) Gt
'
,
(2.6)
Where,Gt is the monte carlo estimator. REINFORCE proved that one can converge to
a locally optimal policy by following the gradient of the expected return. It treated the
policy as a parameterized probability distribution and derived an update rule to increase
the probability of actions that yield higher returns. However, REINFORCE su"ered from
high variance in gradient estimates and slow convergence.
In the early 2000s, the actor-critic architecture emerged as a solution to high variance,
in which a critic estimates the value function while the actor updates the policy. With
the rise of deep learning (DL), the combination of RL and DL became inevitable. This
wave was catalyzed by the success of Deep Q-Network (DQN) in video games and soon
extended to deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) for continuous actions [23]. By
2013, researchers at DeepMind Technologies presented the ﬁrst deep reinforcement learn-
ing model to play Atari games [24]. The authors successfully demonstrated a learned
control policy directly from high-dimensional sensor inputs using reinforcement learning.
The policy outperformed human experts on three games out of seven. Lillicrap et al. in-
troduced DDPG as an actor-critic method to handle high-dimensional continuous actions.
DDPG solved a variety of simulated physics tasks from classic control (e.g., cartpole) to
manipulation. This demonstrated the potential of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to
train robots for ﬁne motor skills using high-dimensional sensor inputs.
Schulman et al.
proposed proximal policy optimization (PPO) [25], one of the most
popular and reliable algorithms for reinforcement learning. PPO uses a clipped surrogate
objective to keep policy updates within a safe range. Nowadays, PPO is the most popular
among robotic simulations and real robot applications. It achieved state-of-the-art results
across benchmark continuous control tasks (e.g., MuJoCo locomotion suite) [26]:
LPPO(ω) = Et
(
LCLIP
t
(ω)
)
(2.7)
This allows multiple epochs of minibatch experience, improving sample e!ciency while
avoiding destructive policy updates.
6

--- PAGE 13 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
Another milestone was achieved by Haarnoja et al. with the introduction of soft actor-
critic (SAC) in 2018. SAC brought the maximum entropy reinforcement learning frame-
work into deep actor-critic algorithms. It encouraged the policy to be as random as pos-
sible while still succeeding at the task. This can be done by augmenting the reward with
an entropy term. The approach addressed the exploration-exploitation trade-o". The
authors demonstrated stability and performance across di"erent random seeds compared
to other o"-policy algorithms [27].
J(ϑ) =
!
t
E(st,at)→ϑ [r(st, at) + ςH(ϑ(·|st))] ,
(2.8)
where H denotes the entropy and ς is a temperature parameter controlling the stochastic-
ity of the policy. SAC outperformed many previous algorithms on both sample e!ciency
and robustness to initialization.
In 2018, an early approach of combined IL and RL was demonstrated by Junhyuk et
al. on self-imitation learning [28]. The approach showed major improvements for advan-
tage actor-critic (A2C) on Atari games[28]. The goal was to imitate the agent’s past
good experiences in the actor-critic framework by storing these experiences in the replay
bu"er[28]:
D = {(st, at, Rt)},
where st, at are a state and an action at time-step t, and
Rt =
↔
!
k=t
ϖk↗trk
is the discounted sum of rewards with a discount factor ϖ.
To exploit only good state-action pairs in the replay bu"er, the following actor-critic
o"-policy loss was proposed[28]:
Lsil = E(s,a,R)→D
(
Lpolicy
sil
+ φsilLvalue
sil
)
(2.9)
Lpolicy
sil
= →log ϑω(a | s) · (R →Vω(s))+
(2.10)
Lvalue
sil
= 1
2 ↗(R →Vω(s))+↗2
(2.11)
Here, (·)+ = max(·, 0) denotes the positive part, ϑω is the policy, Vω(s) is the estimated
value, and φsil is a weighting factor for the value loss. [28]
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
In conclusion, reinforcement learning o"ers a powerful framework for autonomous skill
acquisition. While foundational algorithms like REINFORCE and Actor-to-Critic (A2C)
laid the groundwork for RL, SAC and PPO have enabled scalable and stable learning.
The incorporation of entropy-based exploration strategies, hybrid policy architectures,
and vision-based sensory input, when combined with system identiﬁcation techniques,
has signiﬁcantly expanded the scope of reinforcement learning applications in robotics.
Entropy-based exploration encourages diverse behavior during training, improving the
agent’s ability to generalize across tasks. Hybrid architectures, which may integrate clas-
sical control with learning-based components or combine model-free and model-based RL,
enhance both stability and adaptability. Furthermore, leveraging high-dimensional visual
data as input enables policies to learn from raw sensory observations. When these com-
ponents are uniﬁed with system identiﬁcation—allowing the model to adapt to variations
between simulation and real-world dynamics—the robustness and real-world transferabil-
ity of RL agents are greatly improved. Despite these advances, challanges like simulation
to reality transfer and reward engineering remains only partially solved. This opened up
the opportunity for testing di"erent tasks in the domain of serial manipulators.
2.3 Simulation to reality transfer
As robotics is moving further with virtual training in simulated physics engines[29][30][31],
simulation to reality transfer still poses a challenging question for robotic manipulation.
To address the problem, a paper published on domain randomization (DR) by Tobin et
al. elaborated the use of randomizing the environment variables for robust policy training
[20]. The idea of DR in DRL is to randomize the scene or environment variables in such
a way that the the real-world system behavior is included inside the training distribution
as one of the di"erent realizations.
This allowed the authors to successfully transfer
a grasping task from simulation to reality. This was the ﬁrst attempt at successfully
transferring a policy that was trained only on RGB images.
Other research has focused on learning without domain randomization and has shown
promising outcomes. One study on simulation-to-real transfer without DR achieved this
by performing system identiﬁcation, aligning the simulation more closely with the real-
world system [32]. However, applying system identiﬁcation to each hardware setup, simu-
lation model, and task conﬁguration is resource-intensive. In a collaborative e"ort, scien-
tists from multiple institutions successfully transferred a dexterous manipulation policy
[33] from simulation to the physical world. The evaluated tasks included grasping, reorien-
tation, ﬂick-to-reorientation, drop-and-regrasp, and lifting. The experiments employed an
actor-critic learning framework along with fused sensory modalities. A detailed discussion
of the simulation-to-reality gap appears later in the thesis.
A study on robotic assembly for high-precision tasks was conducted by Inoue et al. [1].
The authors trained a model to solve a peg-in-hole task using deep reinforcement learning.
During training, industrial force-torque sensors were integrated to ensure accurate perfor-
mance in scenarios with tight clearances. In addition, parts were rotated systematically
8

--- PAGE 15 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
to increase the task complexity. An recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture (specif-
ically, an Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)) was adopted for training the RL agent.
The learned policies were then evaluated using a 7-degrees of freedom (DOF) robotic
arm equipped with a two-ﬁnger gripper mounted on the end-e"ector. A related study on
industrial assembly was carried out by Hebecker et al., demonstrating several such tasks,
with some achieving success rates of up to 90 percent in simulation. However, transferring
these trained neural networks to real hardware remained a signiﬁcant challenge.
The follow-up paper on ﬁne motoric motion tasks was published in 2023, named Indus-
tReal [2], led by Tang et al. IndustReal focused more on the task execution method.
New signed distance ﬁeld (SDF)-based rewards were developed to help the agent learn
the policy faster for contact-rich manipulation tasks (e.g., nut-threading, gear insertion,
etc.). simulation aware policy updates (SAPU) and sampling-based curricula allowed the
agent to receive rewards when simulation predictions were more reliable. It helped to
prevent overﬁtting in earlier stages of the curriculum.
In SAPU, the agent learns to avoid interpenetrations[2]. The idea was that for a given
environment of plug and socket mesh, SAPU samples N number of points on/inside the
mesh of the plug. It then transforms these points into the socket frame and computes the
distance between the plug and socket mesh. The algorithm returns maximum penetration
depth for each episode. The depth is used to weight the cumulative rewards during the
policy training [2]. SAPU was evaluated on the peg and hole task for insertion policy
on four di"erent parameters—baseline, ﬁlter only, weight only, and ﬁlter and weight.
The parameters implemented respective logics through which it was realized that the
baseline, ﬁlter only, and weight only strategies were unable to achieve a success rate
above 40 percent. However, the strategy with ﬁlter and weight performed extremely well
over di"erent scenarios, with success rates of over 84 percent. The proposed algorithm 1
provided by IndustReal [2] for SAPU:
Algorithm 1 Interpenetration Checking Per Env.
Input: plug mesh mp, socket mesh ms, plug pose pp, socket pose ps, number of query
points N.
1: sample N points in mp ↘v, v = {v0, . . . , vN↗1};
2: transform v to current mp pose pp in ms frame;
3: for every vertex v ↓v do
4:
compute closest point on ms to v;
5:
if v inside ms then
6:
calculate interpenetration distance;
7:
end if
8: end for
9: dmax
ip
= max interpenetration from all v ↓v to ms;
10: return dmax
ip ;
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
A brief discussion on curriculum learning was done in the work; sampling based curricu-
lum (SBC) was introduced. SBC initializes the agent with access to the entire range of
starting state conditions from the beginning of training[2]. The lower bound is increased
at each stage of the curriculum for e!cient learning. The curriculum learning was evalu-
ated in three di"erent categories—baseline, standard, and sampling-based. The authors
demonstrated that SBC signiﬁcantly outperformed the other two methods in success rates
and position errors. It achieved a success rate of more than 88 percent with a positional
error of 3.8 mm, compared to others with 66 percent success and 10.7 mm positional
errors. The authors used the Factory [34] framework within IsaacGym, through which
the contact dynamics between highly complex geometries were solved.
For the deployment on a real robot, a Franka Emika robot with Realsense D435 camera
was used to carry out the tasks in the real world.
Use of any task-speciﬁc grippers
and force-torque sensor (F/T) sensors was avoided.
task impedance controller (TIC)
was employed to control the output targets from the policy. The targets are processed
with the frankapy Python library to stream the commands via robot operating syatem
(ROS) to the Franka interface library. The Franka interface then sends these commands
to libfranka, which maps TSI commands to low-level joint torques.
The control rate
during the training was 60 Hz. To close the gap between simulation and reality transfer,
policy level action integrator (PLAI) was introduced. In modern robotic controllers, the
propotional and derivative (PD) controller is a common one. The idea behind using the
PD controller was to avoid the accumulation of errors via internal gain (I), to stabilize
robot arms with stationary accuracy. However, in ﬁne motoric tasks like insertion, it
is beneﬁcial to integrate errors for better positional accuracy.
Addressing this, PLAI
integrates the error only at the policy level. Instead of applying actions to the current
state, PLAI applies them to the desired state recursively. The basline follows[2]:
st+1 = st ≃at = st ≃!(ot)
(2.12)
where sd
t+1 is the next state at time t + 1, at is an incremental delta action at time t, st is
the actual state, ot is the actual observation, ! is the policy, and ≃computes the state
update (e.g., for states deﬁned by position and orientation, ≃computes composition with
a translation and rotation) [2].
In contrast, PLAI applies the action to the previous desired state rather than the current
one. This means the desired state at t + 1 is updated using the desired state at t, not the
actual state, as follows[2]:
sd
t+1 = sd
t ≃at = sd
t ≃!(ot)
(2.13)
For t = 0 . . . T,
10

--- PAGE 17 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
sd
T = sd
0 ≃
T↗1
!
i=0
ai = sd
0 ≃
T↗1
!
i=0
!(oi)
(2.14)
PLAI shares similarities with classical propotional, integral and derivative (PID) con-
trollers, especially when paired with PD control. IndustReal validated this relationship
empirically. Results showed that PLAI is easy to implement and tune. Like PID con-
trollers, PLAI can su"er from windup. Windup occurs when large accumulated errors
cause overshoot, slow recovery, and poor performance. To counteract this, Leaky PLAI
was introduced, which clamps the accumulated control e"orts [2].
A brief comparison was conducted to evaluate PLAI’s e"ect on simulation-to-reality trans-
fer. Tang et al. found that PLAI (applying actions to the desired state) signiﬁcantly
improved performance and reduced positional error compared to the nominal method
(applying actions to the current state). The evaluation was done on several tasks—Pick,
Place, Sort, Insert, and Pick-Place-Insert. This work set the benchmark for state-of-the-
art research in robotic assemblies.
Recent works like Force-Mimic [35] and DROID [36] demonstrate how large-scale datasets
and hybrid learning strategies integrate IL and RL for the improvement of contact-rich
skill acquisition. Imitation-bootstrapped RL [19] accelerated convergence and reduced
unsafe exploration.
A new study on force-based control policies proposed a method to train an RL agent with
force-torque sensor feedback. force-guided exploration for robust contact-rich manipula-
tion under uncertainty (FORGE) [37] managed to complete three ﬁne motoric tasks—peg
insertion, gear insertion, and nut-threading—proving the importance of force-torque feed-
back during simulation. FORGE formulated the problem as a partially observed markov
decision process (POMDP).
A POMDP is deﬁned by the tuple: (S, A, ”, T, O, R, ϖ). The goal is to learn a parame-
terized policy, ϑω(at | o1, . . . , ot), that maximizes the expected return [37]:
J(ϑω) = Eε→p(ε|ϑω,!)
$ ↔
!
t=0
ϖtrt
%
(2.15)
where ϱ = (s0, a0, o0, s1, a1, o1, . . .) is the trajectory of states, actions, and observations
resulting from the robot following policy ϑω.
Unlike markov decision process (MDP)
(where the policy has the information about all the states at all time), the policy in
POMDP depends on observations to take actions.
The main idea of FORGE to get the force-torque feedback from the force-torque sensor
and incorporate it in the simulation during training. Force penalties were introduced to
allow the agent to learn based on this feedback[37]:
Rcontact
pen
(F ee
t ) = →φ · max (0, ↗F ee
t ↗→Fth)
(2.16)
11

--- PAGE 18 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
where Fth is the force threshold and φ is the penalty weight. During training, the policy is
penalized if the contact force, F ee
t , experienced by the arm exceeds the threshold[37].
At ﬁrst during training, di"erent rewards and penalties are given to the agent. The re-
wards include dense rewards (also used in IndustReal [2]) and sparse rewards. Dense
rewards are characterized by frequent, often continuous feedback across the state-action
space, enabling gradual policy improvement. In contrast, sparse rewards are only emitted
under speciﬁc conditions—typically upon reaching a goal state—o"ering limited learning
signals. Three di"erent categories were introduced in the dense rewards section—baseline,
coarse, and ﬁne. To terminate the agent after each successful episode, early termination
conditions based on keypoint distance were introduced. Three tasks were trained and
validated, including peg-insertion, gear-insertion, and nut-threading. The authors then
trained models with three di"erent seeds for each task, and the ﬁnal results were aver-
aged. Constant gaussian distribution noise on observations and domain randomization
on task speciﬁc part positions were used during training to facilitate simulation-to-reality
transfer.
As the research moved further, more datasets and methodologies were developed. Re-
cently, a study conducted by Tang et al. on specialist and generalist assembly policies
achieved great success in solving complex manipulation tasks. AutoMate [38] demon-
strated a learning framework that consisted of a dataset of more than 100 assemblies in
simulation and the real world, and a novel simulation-based approach for learning special-
ist policies and generalist policies. Specialist policies are part-speciﬁc policies, whereas
generalist policies are more uniﬁed. The results of this research showed more than 80
percent success in specialist policies for 80 di"erent assemblies in simulation and general-
ist policies for 20 di"erent assemblies. The follow-up research in this year demonstrated
the method for skill retrieval and skill adaptation. Another novel framework was de-
signed to address precision control task problems.
Skill retrieval and skill adaptation
(SRSA) [39] signiﬁcantly outperformed the baseline methods. A self-imitation learning
followed by reinforcement learning training was performed to achieve skill adaptation and
retrieval.
2.4 Selection of Tasks
In this thesis, as mentioned in the introduction, two tasks need to be trained for the
validation of the pre-existing pipeline. Numerous research studies on ﬁne motoric assembly
tasks have already been published. Hence, it is important to choose the tasks based on
its comparability with available benchmarks. One of the most common tasks used by
scientists to benchmark IL and RL performance is insertion.
Be it peg-in-hole, gear
insertion, or any assembly task related to insertion, these challenges have been addressed
using various methods over time.
In 1995, an early attempt to model the round peg-in-hole task using a robotic manipulator
was formulated with the help of a model-based solution [40]. Faras J. Abu-Dakka et al.
12

--- PAGE 19 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
published a paper addressing the peg-in-hole task using di"erent geometrical shapes (e.g.,
square peg, round peg, etc.) and sizes [13]. Imitation learning for peg-in-hole tasks was
solved by Yaskawa robots with high precision [3]. A set of benchmark assembly tasks was
introduced by NIST, designed to be used for evaluating robotic capabilities. NIST task
boards were developed to assess a robot’s performance in high-precision tasks such as
gear meshing, nut threading, and insertion. The components varied in shape, size, type,
and placement. NIST also provided computer aided design (CAD) models for each part
to support simulation in virtual environments. A structured guideline was provided to
simplify real-world implementation of the benchmarking process.
An extensive study was conducted on six o#ine learning and algorithms for robot manip-
ulation across ﬁve simulated and three real-world multi-stage manipulation tasks. Man-
dlekar et al. [41] demonstrated a range of tasks with increasing complexity and varied
dataset quality. The study analyzed the e"ects of observation space and multi-dimensional
hyperparameters on the overall success rate. Furthermore, it evaluated the impact of
dataset size on policy improvement.
The industry gradually shifted towards simulation for automation tasks, particularly after
the work by Narang et al., a joint research e"ort between NVIDIA and the University of
Washington, who introduced Factory [34]. Before Factory, foundational work on simula-
tion and sim-to-real transfer had already been conducted [42], [43], [44]. Although many
promising results had been achieved in this domain [45], [46], [47], [48], [49], [50], contact-
rich tasks remained a longstanding challenge [51], [52], [53], [54]. Factory proved to be a
groundbreaking development. The paper presented a set of physics simulation techniques
and robot learning tools for contact-rich assembly applications. With over 60 part models,
it o"ered a diverse range of robotic assembly environments, including contact-rich scenes
and controllers for virtual testing and training. The authors also trained proof-of-concept
RL policies for nut-and-bolt assembly. The toolkit was released as open-source, enabling
engineers to train their own policies with ease.
Narang et al. achieved a combined pick, place, and screw task. The goal was to pick
a screw, place it on top of a bolt, and screw it in. This was accomplished by training
subpolicies within a uniﬁed policy. Consider screwing: a robot must twist a nut into a
bolt. The ﬁrst subpolicy handles the picking of the bolt—challenging due to required
accuracy. Factors such as part orientation and position contribute to complexity. The
second subpolicy involves placing the nut onto the bolt, which is di!cult due to assembly
tolerances. Following that, the third subpolicy completes the screwing action, which is the
most di!cult, as the agent must learn a twisting motion. This motion takes longer to learn
due to the complexity of optimizing rotational actions. During experiments, researchers
observed challenges when randomizing the robot’s state. Grasp stability degraded with
increasing randomization. Moreover, the convex representation of the part was inadequate
for simulating contact-rich interactions. A convex decomposition was used to mimic the
bolt’s geometry; however, spatial artifacts introduced instability and inaccuracy. Factory
established a foundation for simulation and RL training based on NIST task boards.
13

--- PAGE 20 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
Tang et al. [2] demonstrated peg-and-hole assemblies with various types of pegs (e.g.,
square, rectangular, and circular). The authors ﬁrst trained a reach policy where the
robot learned to move the end-e"ector (EE) to randomized positions. The reach policy
was then ﬁne-tuned to perform a pick-and-place task. The success criteria were redeﬁned
accordingly during retraining. They found that training in free space and ﬁne-tuning
on contact was more e!cient than training from scratch. Domain randomization was
deliberately avoided; however, its absence did not a"ect overall performance.
A key methodology of IndustReal was the use of SDF-based dense rewards, as proposed in
Factory. The authors introduced keypoint rewards based on Euclidean distances between
components. For instance, in a peg-in-hole task, keypoint rewards compute distances be-
tween speciﬁc peg and hole positions. This is referred to as the collinear keypoints reward.
The paper compared various reward types—collinear keypoints, 6-DOF keypoints, cham-
fer keypoints, and SDF query distances. The SDF query reward performed consistently
best among them. This work tackled multiple insertion tasks, including the plug-socket
insertion (also known as NEMA connector insertion). NEMA connectors are standard-
ized electrical plug systems. This paper focused primarily on peg-in-hole and plug-socket
insertion.
Overall, this section provided an overview of industrial assembly tasks. It discussed core
methodologies involved in executing those tasks. However, some limitations remain:
Simulation-to-reality gap: One of the most common challenges is transferring policies
from simulation to the real world. Policies are trained in ideal simulated conditions but
tested under real-world dynamics. This gap is signiﬁcant. To reduce it, techniques such as
domain randomization, system identiﬁcation, and noise injection should be applied.
Part geometry: In certain cases, part geometry is so complex that standard training
approaches become ine"ective. The issue lies not in geometric quality but in how it is used.
Take, for example, the Factory nut-threading task. The bolt has high structural detail
(e.g., number of triangles), but resolving the geometry requires signiﬁcant computational
resources. This raises the question: should we prioritize geometric detail or faster training?
The solution lies in striking a balance between both.
Physical properties: As discussed in the IndustReal paper, simulating physical prop-
erties such as friction introduces additional challenges. System identiﬁcatio or DR could
help address this issue.
Simulation ﬁdelity: Tasks with greater complexity (e.g., cable assembly on pulleys)
are limited by the ﬁdelity of the simulator. Many simulators are neither accurate nor
e!cient enough to support robust sim-to-real policy transfer [2]. Improvements in mesh
modeling, such as those proposed by [34], can enhance simulation realism—although the
scale of improvement remains uncertain.
Generalization: For complex industrial environments, achieving zero-shot sim-to-real
transfer is a key objective. Recent research on skill retrieval and adaptation [39] can help
generalize policies across task variations.
14

--- PAGE 21 ---
3 Methodology
In this chapter, a brief introduction to the existing pipeline is given. At ﬁrst, deep learn-
ing pipline overview is provided, followed by data collection method. The chapter then
focuses on synthetic data generation and imitation learning model training. Afterwards,
a comprehensive overview on reinforcement learnig model training as well as methods to
transfer control policies from simulation into the reality is given.
3.1 Workﬂow overview
Due to the large number of components (e.g. software and hardware), it is necessary to
maintain a ﬂow in the robotic communication. Just like robots that are working on Robot
operating system 2 (ROS2) require robustness in the communication, artiﬁcial intelligent
systems consisting of both hardware and software require robust input and output data
ﬂow. Figure 3.1 provides an overview of the ﬂow (a.k.a pipeline).
The pipeline starts from demonstration collection. For any imitation learning training,
data is required. The data generally includes ground truth information of states and
actions. Data collection can be done by collecting actions of the agent at a particular
state, based on which an imitation learning model can be trained. This data collection
can be done in either simulation or real environment with the help of tele-operation.
Tele-operation using Isaac Lab and IsaacSim allows the users to collect data in a simulation
environment. However, collecting too much data can be time-consuming. Hence, around
20–40 demonstrations are generally taken. Collected data is saved in hierarchical data
format (HDF5) ﬁle format. HDF5 is designed to store and organize large amounts of data
in a hierarchical manner. Data augmentation or synthetic data generation tool called
MimicGen[17] is leveraged to generate thousands of successful demonstrations based on
the original demonstrations.
The generated data is employed to train imitation learning models using Robomimic
[41].
Standard imitation learning algorithms like BC are already implemented in the
RoboMimic. After training, a checkpoint/neural network with weights is generated, which
is in the PyTorch.pth format.
15

--- PAGE 22 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
Fig. 3.1: Workﬂow overview
Let this checkpoint be called imitation learning checkpoint. To train an RL model, the
imitation learning checkpoint is provided as a bootstrapped checkpoint. Since IL and RL
rely on di"erent libraries and implementation frameworks, a checkpoint conversion step
is necessary to ensure compatibility, allowing the integration of a pre-trained IL agent
within the RL training pipeline. The weights and biases are transferred, making it a
reinforcement learning checkpoint. The agent is then trained with reinforcement learning
to improve the policy. After successful training, an RL checkpoint is generated, consisting
of weights and biases.
All of the above procedure is done in the simulation environment. Hence, it is necessary to
deploy these models/checkpoints to see the performance in a real-world setup. To deploy
and infer models, all the checkpoints are required to be in the form of standard pytorch
policy. The process is rather simple. At ﬁrst, a PyTorch model is created with random
initialization of weights and biases. Then, A transfer of weights from either imitation
learning or reinforcement learning checkpoints is done to the pytorch model. Pytorch
policy is ready to be used for the inference.
16

--- PAGE 23 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
This workﬂow can be applied to train a policy for any new task. Detailed discussion on
demo collection, data generation, model training and simulation to reality transfer is done
in the following sections.
3.2 Demonstration collection
Demo collection is an essential part of imitation learning. Before the development of
realistic simulation tools, demonstration collection was done from the real robot. It is
an iterative and common, but time taking and money consuming problem. Addressing
this, Isaac Lab instroduced a demo collection pipeline that can collect, store and replay
demonstrations. Isaac Lab built upon Isaac Sim allows users to train IL and RL agents
in a gym environment. Gym(Gymnasium) is a standard interface for RL environments.
A gym environment commonly consists deﬁnitions for observations, actions, rewards, and
terminations.
In this pipeline, a joint space demonstration collection pipeline is used. The ﬁrst and
foremost question was to decide on which action space should be used for the agent
training and deployment.
To collect data, a gym environment is necessary. After successful creation of gym envi-
ronment, record manager(a class with helping functions for demo recording) is leveraged
to systematically record the demonstrations. It can be recorded either with keyboard,
space mouse or via hand-guiding in real-time.
Launch Isaac Sim
Parse Task Config
Attach Teleop Interface
(keyboard and hand-tracking)
Convert Action to Cartesian Pose
Differential IK to get joint commands
Step Environment and Execute
Actions
Check Success Condition
Record & Export to HDF5
Fig. 3.2: Demo Collection
17

--- PAGE 24 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
Figure 3.2 shows the method for how the demo is collected in the simulation environment.
The pipeline is initiated by launching Isaac Sim simulator, followed by conﬁguration from
recording environment. The environment can be initiated using task-speciﬁc conﬁgura-
tion. This can be passed through Isaac Lab application programming interface (API). An
interface is attached to the end e"ector of the robot which allows 7-DOF control input
from the operator. Each action input from the teleoperation device is converted into a
target cartesian pose for the EE. The pose is then processed using di"erential inverse
kinematics (DIK) controller to compute joint position commands. The calculated joint
positions are converted to incremental changes from the previous measured values and
passed as actions to the environment.
The robot executes the teleoperated trajectory. Success condition checker is used to mon-
itor whether the robot has completed the task,as deﬁned by pre-conﬁgured termination
criterion. Once the task success is triggered, the task is marked as a successful demon-
stration. The demonstration is saved in HDF5 ﬁle.
3.3 Synthetic data generation
Synthetic data generation has become an important part of robot learning. In context of
robotics, training a generalized model requires large, diverse and high-quality data, cover-
ing the relevant target distribution. Manual demonstration collection is often tedious and
time-consuming. To address this, Isaac Lab supports synthetic data generation through
the use of simulation environments and augmentation of expert trajectories.
Data generation in Isaac Lab is enabled by a tool called MimicGen [17]. Designed to scale
up imitation learning by synthesizing thoudands of demonstrations, MimicGen operates
by replaying demonstrations in simulation and introducing scene variations such as object
pose, background and lighting. This leads to more diverse dataset that enhances policy
robustness and generalization.
At ﬁrst, Data annotations are done on the collected data. To leverage the annotation
tool, an environment is required. This environmet should be build on the top of main
reinforcement learning gym environment. During the thesis, it is mentioned as Isaac Lab
mimic environment. After annotating the collected data, data generation can be done
with ﬁnal dataset of chosen numbers of trajectories exported in hdf5 format. This data
can also be replayed to manually check the authenticity and quality.
3.3.1 Data annotation
Built on top of the reinforcement learning environment, the Isaac Lab mimic environment
allows users to generate data within the same scene that is used for reinforcement learning.
The environment uses the same physical properties (e.g., gravity, friction, mass of the
objects, etc.) as the learning environment. Only data annotation and data generation use
18

--- PAGE 25 ---
Dhruvil Prafullbhai Mahidhariya
DEFT
this mimic environment; the rest of the tasks (e.g., agent training, reward design, etc.)
are carried out in the standard reinforcement learning environment.
To facilitate structured learning in complex tasks, it is essential to enrich raw demon-
strations with task-relevant metadata. The annotation process augments collected data
by identifying and labeling subtask boundaries and providing detailed scene and robot
information, such as the robot end-e"ector position. Subtasks are checkpoints deﬁned
in the environment that indicate the success of a particular logic. For example, check-
ing whether the robot is engaged with an object, or whether the task is half completed
or fully completed, etc. The annotations are achieved through a post-processing script
which replays demonstration trajectories and records environment state information for
each timestep.
Depending on the conﬁguration, annotations can be conducted either manually or in auto-
matic mode. For this thesis, manually annotating every demonstration is time-consuming;
hence, the automatic mode is used. In automatic mode, the subtask signals(i.e., success
logics) are automatically detected by the environment based on programmed logic. The
annotations are stored in HDF5 format and serve as a structured foundation for data
generation.
3.3.2 Data generation
The annotated data is provided to the synthetic data generation script as an input. The
script initializes a data generator class that performs trajectory sampling and perturba-
tion. Iterating over episodes in the annotated HDF5 ﬁle, it applies conﬁguration aug-
mentation strategies. Conﬁguration augmentation in Isaac Lab refers to the randomized
variation of task and environment parameters during data generation to enhance policy
robustness and generalization. It saves the synthesized rollouts with success labeling and
metadata in the same HDF5 format.
Annotated Demos
Waypoint Sampling
Rollout Generation
Success Filter
Final Dataset
Fig. 3.3: Synthetic data generation pipeline
As shown in Figure 3.3, for ﬁne-grained motion generation, the system uses a waypoint
class that extracts and perturbs intermediate waypoints from the trajectories.
Here,
relevant states—usually those close to successful subtask completion—are extracted as
waypoints. Each waypoint deﬁnes a target conﬁguration or an objective for the rollout
episode.
Next, the data generation module, deﬁned in data_generator, takes the waypoints and
initializes the environment scene in various randomized conditions.
With the help of
domain randomization(i.e., randomization on asset positions, robot positions etc.), ro-
bustness is achieved in the simulated rollouts from the sampled start states to the target
goals. However, not all generated rollouts are suitable for export. A success ﬁlter, de-
ﬁned in the Isaac Lab mimic environment, is applied. The module replays each generated
19


[... truncated at page 25 of 88 ...]
