--- PAGE 1 ---
Transfer Learning in Human Activity Recognition: A Survey
SOURISH GUNESH DHEKANE, THOMAS PLÖTZ∗, School of Interactive Computing, College of
Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Sensor-based human activity recognition (HAR) has been an active research area, owing to its applications in smart environ-
ments, assisted living, fitness, healthcare, etc. Recently, deep learning based end-to-end training has resulted in state-of-the-art
performance in domains such as computer vision and natural language, where large amounts of annotated data are available.
However, large quantities of annotated data are not available for sensor-based HAR. Moreover, the real-world settings on
which the HAR is performed differ in terms of sensor modalities, classification tasks, and target users. To address this problem,
transfer learning has been employed extensively. In this survey, we focus on these transfer learning methods in the application
domains of smart home and wearables-based HAR. In particular, we provide a problem-solution perspective by categorizing
and presenting the works in terms of their contributions and the challenges they address. We also present an updated view of
the state-of-the-art for both application domains. Based on our analysis of 205 papers, we highlight the gaps in the literature
and provide a roadmap for addressing them. This survey provides a reference to the HAR community, by summarizing the
existing works and providing a promising research agenda.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Human Activity Recognition, Transfer Learning, Domain Adaptation
ACM Reference Format:
Sourish Gunesh Dhekane, Thomas Plötz. 2018. Transfer Learning in Human Activity Recognition: A Survey. ACM Comput.
Surv. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2018), 40 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Human activity recognition (HAR) for building intelligent systems has been a focal point of research over the last
few decades, considering its applications in domains like healthcare [12], surveillance [191], and sports [6]. The
progress in this domain has mainly been enabled by advances in sensing technologies [37], and most importantly,
machine learning [113]. The goal of HAR is to use the data collected by sensors placed at strategic locations
(on-body or embedded in the environment) and classify it into the intended target activities. The workflow of
HAR has been traditionally viewed as a five-step process, containing: (i) data collection, (ii) pre-processing,
(iii) segmentation, (iv) feature extraction, and (v) classification [31]. The biggest challenge in front of the HAR
community lies in the first step of this workflow, i.e., data collection [139].
Collection of sensor data, and more importantly, annotating it correctly, is a challenging task. Unlike visual or
language data, which can be scraped from the internet, collecting sensor data requires a sensor installation process,
user consent, and manual efforts. Moreover, unlike images, videos, or language data instances, sensor data is not
human interpretable, which makes it extremely hard to annotate the collected data. Thus, collecting labeled data
for every specific HAR problem and training an end-to-end system to perform activity recognition is not practical.
∗This work is partially supported by CISCO.
Author’s address: Sourish Gunesh Dhekane, Thomas Plötz, sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu,thomas.ploetz@gatech.edu, School of Interactive
Computing, College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2018/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information
arXiv:2401.10185v1  [cs.LG]  18 Jan 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Transfer learning offers an alternate, and more practical, solution to this problem by leveraging the knowledge
gained from performing a task on the source domain into a new task to be performed on the target domain. In
domains like vision and language, transfer learning has been proven to be successful in achieving data efficiency,
generalization, and adaptation to new tasks [51, 69, 88, 183, 223]. However, performing transfer learning in the
domain of HAR is not straightforward and there are substantial challenges that need to be addressed.
The biggest technical challenge in performing transfer learning for HAR is the difference in feature space
induced by factors like different sensor modalities, locations, devices, etc., across domains. Unlike images, videos,
or text, where data instances from both domains can easily be mapped on a common feature space, such is not the
case in many HAR applications. Thus, mapping of data points on a common feature space is a de-facto challenge
to address in such applications. Another challenge in HAR is the unavailability of massive annotated datasets
like ImageNet [52], which enable researchers to design high-capacity neural networks that can generalize across
settings. Instead, the HAR domain has multiple small-scale datasets, each with its own setting in terms of the
sensor modality, device, frequency, and so on. Thus, addressing this limitation posed by the lack of such large-scale
homogeneous labeled datasets is a prominent research interest. Finally, the transfer learning solutions should also
be consistent with the use cases for which they are designed. In other words, these solutions must obey certain
constraints that are imposed by the problem setting. For instance, the requirement of having a model well-suited
for a specific set of individuals (personalization) or the requirement of data privacy (federated/distributed learning)
are some of the additional challenges that need to be tackled, in addition to performing a successful knowledge
transfer across domains. In conclusion, transfer learning in HAR is an active research area with several unsolved
challenges that carry huge significance.
Through this survey, we explored and analyzed the solutions proposed for addressing these challenges. The
specific contributions of our survey are as follows:
• We provide background and define the problem of HAR from the perspectives of human activities and
sensors so that a new researcher in this field can get introduced formally to the problem setting. We also
define transfer learning and provide both the problem and the solution perspectives suitable for HAR.
• As our main contributions, we select the application domains of smart homes and wearables to collect
over 205 works that perform transfer learning. We classify these works based on the challenges that they
address as well as the methods they employ. We present this analysis in the problem-solution perspective,
where for each challenge, its description, relevance, source and target domain settings, and approaches for
addressing it are presented.
• After presenting this analysis, we enumerate the state-of-the-art transfer learning works from both smart
home and wearable HAR domains along with their contributions in terms of the challenges addressed,
novel methodologies used, comparisons performed, and performances obtained.
• Based on our literature exploration and review of the state-of-the-art, we locate the gaps in the literature
in terms of unaddressed challenges and unused methodologies that have the potential to perform well
in addressing said challenges. We then provide a roadmap for the HAR community to focus on those
highlighted challenges and methods in future works.
With this survey, we aim to direct the focus of the HAR community toward the unaddressed challenges and
opportunities present in the domain of transfer learning with our stated research agenda. Although several works
have obtained decent levels of performance in specific HAR settings, learning a generalized HAR framework
that can perform inference across diverse settings, without a lot of additional adjustments is essential for the
community to move forward in this field. We hope that this survey serves that purpose.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 3 ---
Activity
Taxonomy
Sensors
Transfer
Learning
Scope
Movements, Activities, Actions, Behaviors
Movement, Physiological, Physical, Contextual, Visual
Inductive (Self-taught & Multi-task), Unsupervised,
Transductive (Domain adaptation & Sample Selection Bias)
Transfer
Learning
Application 
Domains
Instance, Feature, Parameter, Knowledge-Base
Activities of Daily Living, Smart Homes
Narrative
Fig. 1. Concept map, where we present both the scope and the narrative of our survey. The items highlighted are included in
the scope. The narrative shows the categorization of the solution space presented in the survey.
2
BACKGROUND
This survey covers two main concepts: human activity recognition and transfer learning. Before moving into their
exploration, we first provide the necessary background and introduce terminologies present in these domains.
We also use these terminologies to define the scope of our survey and present the concept map in Figure 1.
2.1
Human Activities
Numerous works have contributed towards describing the term activity in the context of human activity recogni-
tion [29, 130, 193]. Vrigkas et al. [193] describe activity as a task performed by a human using physical motion and
classify it into (i) a gesture (primitive movements), (ii) an atomic action (single motion piece), (iii) an interaction
with the environment, (iv) a behavior (sequence of actions representing the emotional state), or (v) an event
(high-level context-aware occurrences). These categories cover the entire range of abstraction levels (Figure 2),
starting from gestures and atomic actions (granular) to behaviors and events (abstract), where activities lie in
between these extremes. This extent of interpretation forms the basis of the taxonomy of human activities.
One of the initial hierarchies for activities was proposed by Nagel [130], where the terms changes, events,
verbs, and histories were used to describe deviations in signals, activity descriptors, activities, and extended
sequences of activities, respectively. Bobick’s work [29] added more description to each level of this hierarchy
and presented a new system consisting of movements, activities, and actions. Bobick defined movements as
atomic, predictable, and consistent motion units characterized by a space-time trajectory. Based on this, activities
were defined as sequences of movements with consistent patterns, and actions were defined as large-scale events
with a context that lies at the intersection of perception and cognition. Here, actions lie on a higher level of
abstraction than activities, however, a majority of literature [32, 83, 129, 185] either considers actions as more
granular than activities or uses these two terms interchangeably, depending on the use case. Thus, in this survey,
we consider both activities and actions as in scope (Figure 1). In Figure 2, we plot these previously discussed
terms based on their levels of abstraction and provide examples to clarify their real-life interpretations.
2.2
Sensors
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines sensors as "transducers that convert a physical,
biological, or chemical parameter into electrical signals" [1]. In the domain of HAR, sensors are considered
as such physical devices that can collect data originating from human movements, activities, actions, and
behaviors occurring in their environment. From the perspective of data modalities, various physical quantities
including motion (e.g., acceleration, angular velocities, orientation), physiological measures (e.g., heart rate, blood
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 4 ---
Bobick 
Movements
Activities
Actions
Changes
Verbs
Events
Histories
Nagel
Gesture
Atomic action
Interactions
Behavior
Event
Vrigkas
Abstraction Levels
Swinging of a bat: 
primitive, atomic,
consistent motion piece
Rowing of a boat: 
sequence of multiple
motion pieces 
Taking a shower: 
sequence of multiple
motion pieces with context
Routines / Behaviors: 
high-level description of a
sequence of standalone
actions or activities  
Granular
Abstract
Fig. 2. Illustration of the taxonomy of human activities: The interpretation of the term activity varies across different
abstraction levels. We plot the terminologies proposed by Bobick [29], Nagel [130], and Vrigkas et al. [193] as per their level
of abstraction from a granular to abstract direction. We also provide examples to visualize these terminologies.
pressure, oxygen levels, sweating), temperature, contextual information (e.g., relative positioning, radio-frequency
identifiers, open/close detection), audio, visual (e.g., RGB, depth, thermal) data can be measured [37].
In the HAR literature, different types of sensing modalities are used in different application domains. Broadly,
they are categorized into wearable and external sensors [113]. The most commonly used wearable sensors are
on-body inertial measurement units (IMUs) located at different sensing positions like wrist, chest, waist, and
ankle. An IMU typically consists of accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer sensors, which collect tri-axial
accelerations, angular velocities, and magnetic field readings, respectively. Some wearable devices are also capable
of measuring physical (temperature and humidity) or physiological (ECG and blood pressure) signals.
In the case of external sensors, they are typically installed in locations of interest in a smart environment.
The data collected by these sensors either represents an interaction of humans with target objects like doors,
kitchen appliances, and switches or a measurement of physical quantities like motion, temperature, and pressure
in the vicinity of the installed sensor. Such sensors, also called ambient sensors, are mostly used in smart home
environments to recognize activities of daily living (ADL). Visual sensors such as RGB, Kinect, and depth cameras
are also considered among external sensors, which are primarily useful for security, surveillance, and interactive
applications. The focus of this survey, as shown in Figure 1, will be on sensor-based HAR. In particular, we
focus on sensors that measure aspects related to movements (e.g., IMU, motion sensors), physical measures (e.g.,
temperature, pressure sensors), and contextual measures (e.g., open/close switches) in the scope of our survey.
2.3
Human Activity Recognition
Referring to the description of human activities and sensors, we provide a formal definition of HAR, inspired
from the work by Lara & Labrador [113]. A typical HAR setup consists of a set of sensors 𝑆= {𝑆1,𝑆2, ...,𝑆𝑛}
deployed for data collection, where each sensor 𝑆𝑖collects sensor readings {𝑆𝑖
𝑡1,𝑆𝑖
𝑡1+1, ...,𝑆𝑖
𝑡2} in the time interval
𝑇from timestamps 𝑡1 to 𝑡2. The problem of HAR is defined as: (i) partitioning 𝑇into intervals {𝑇1,𝑇2, ...,𝑇𝑘} such
that Ð𝑘
𝑖=1𝑇𝑖= 𝑇and (ii) allotting each of this 𝑇𝑖= {𝑡𝑚,𝑡𝑚+1, ...,𝑡𝑛} an activity label using the corresponding
sensor data {𝑆𝑖
𝑡𝑚,𝑆𝑖
𝑡𝑚+1, ...,𝑆𝑖
𝑡𝑛}. This problem is complex in nature as a large number of activities may take place
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 5 ---
Transfer
Learning
Same Task
Different Tasks
Transductive
TL
Inductive
TL
Assumption:
ONLY Source Annotations Available
Assumption:
Target Annotations Available
Same
Domain
Different
Domains
Domain
Adaptation
Sample Selection Bias
Covariance Shift
Source Labels
Available
Source Labels
Not Available
Multi-Task
Learning
Self-Taught
Learning
No Source/Target Labels
Unsupervised
TL
Instance
Transfer
Feature
Transfer
Parameter
Transfer
Knowledge-Base
Transfer
Data Instances Feature Spaces
Parameters
Domain Knowledge
Target Labels
Available
Target Labels
Not Available
Supervised
Transfer
Unsupervised
Transfer
Problem Perspective
Solution Perspective
Fig. 3. Categorizations in Transfer Learning inspired from the works of [136] and [199]. Here we provide both the problem
perspective, where transfer learning approaches are classified based on the characteristics of the problem setting, and the
solution perspective, where the classification is based on the kind of knowledge which is transferred across the domains.
in overlapping intervals. Thus, a relaxed version of this problem can be formulated by assuming a sliding window
protocol and defining a target activity set. In particular, we can divide the time interval 𝑇in partially-overlapping
windows of equal size {𝑊1,𝑊2, ...,𝑊𝑛} and assume a target activity set 𝑌= {𝑌1,𝑌2, ...,𝑌𝑙} to reformulate the HAR
problem as assigning each window 𝑊𝑖with an activity label 𝑌𝑗.
The commonly used approach to solve this problem is via the activity recognition chain [31], which consists
of five stages: (i) data acquisition, (ii) signal preprocessing, (iii) segmentation, (iv) feature extraction, and (v)
classification. The research works in HAR focus on improving these individual stages by targeting challenges
in developing sensing technologies, setting up data acquisition systems, better feature extraction & inference/-
classification frameworks, and many more areas. One such area is improving the ability of the HAR systems to
generalize in the presence of a change in sensing environments and target activities. Transfer learning is the
most intuitive way in which this challenge can be addressed.
2.4
Transfer Learning
In machine learning, a supervised classification problem aims at learning a predictive function 𝑓: 𝑋→𝑌, where
𝑋= {𝑋1,𝑋2, ...,𝑋𝑚} represents the set of data points and 𝑌= {𝑌1,𝑌2, ...,𝑌𝑘} represents the set of class labels. Each
data point 𝑋𝑖can be represented by an 𝑛dimensional feature vector [𝑋1
𝑖,𝑋2
𝑖, ...,𝑋𝑛
𝑖] from the vector space 𝜒. The
set of data points 𝑋follows a marginal distribution 𝑃(𝑋). Referring to this notation, a domain 𝐷is defined by the
underlying feature vector space 𝜒and the marginal distribution 𝑃(𝑋). A task 𝑇, such as supervised classification,
is defined by the label set 𝑌and the predictive function 𝑓.
A domain 𝐷1 differs from another domain 𝐷2 if their underlying feature spaces or marginal probability
distributions differ, i.e., 𝜒1 ≠𝜒2 or 𝑃(𝑋1) ≠𝑃(𝑋2). Likewise, a task𝑇1 differs from another task𝑇2 if their respective
label sets or predictive functions, in terms of conditional probabilities, differ, i.e., 𝑌1 ≠𝑌2 or 𝑃(𝑌1|𝑋1) ≠𝑃(𝑌2|𝑋2).
On the basis of this formulation, transfer learning is defined as a set of methodologies that help improve the
performance of task 𝑇𝑡on domain 𝐷𝑡using the knowledge gained by performing the task 𝑇𝑠on the domain 𝐷𝑠,
where either 𝐷𝑠≠𝐷𝑡or 𝑇𝑠≠𝑇𝑡or both. In this context, 𝐷𝑠and 𝐷𝑡are referred to as the source and the target
domains, respectively. This definition of transfer learning consists of two important components: (i) the problem
setting (similarity or differences in domains and tasks) and (ii) the interpretation of the term knowledge. This
gives rise to the categorization of transfer learning into the problem and the solution perspectives.
The problem perspective, as shown in Figure 3, classifies transfer learning based on whether the underlying
domains or tasks across the source and target domains are the same. Specifically, transfer learning is classified into
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 6 ---
Table 1. The solution perspective of transfer learning. We divide the approaches into instance, feature, parameter, and
knowledge-base transfer, based on what they transfer. This table represents the key themes explored in each category.
Types
Methods
Instance Transfer
Instance Weighing, Instance Mapping & Label Propagation, Soure Domain Selection, Synthetic Data Generation
Feature Space Transfer
Conventional, Neural Network Based: (a) Architectures, (b) Loss Functions, (c) Training Strategies
Parameter Transfer
Conventional, Neural Network Based: (a) Architectures, (b) Loss Functions, (c) Training Strategies
Knowledge Base Transfer
Domain-specific Metadata, Heuristics, Context Information
Transductive and Inductive problems, if 𝑇𝑠= 𝑇𝑡and 𝑇𝑠≠𝑇𝑡, respectively. Since 𝑇𝑠= 𝑇𝑡for transductive transfer
learning, 𝐷𝑠has to be different from 𝐷𝑡in order for the domains to differ. This case is referred to as Domain
Adaptation. In the literature there also exist cases where both the domains and the tasks across settings are the
same, yet there is presence of sample selection bias or covariate shift. Such cases are also assumed to be under
the purview of transfer learning. Inductive transfer learning is further classified into Multi-task and Self-taught
Learning on the basis of the availability of the source labels, i.e., {𝑌𝑠
𝑖}𝑚
𝑖=1. From this problem perspective, the
domain of transfer learning mostly covers these four settings, i.e., domain adaptation, sample selection bias /
covariate shift, multi-task learning, and self-taught learning, which are included in our survey’s scope (Figure 1).
In the remaining cases where none of the source or target labels are available, the learning problem becomes
unsupervised in nature, consisting of tasks like clustering, dimensionality reduction, and density estimation.
The solution perspective of transfer learning, as shown in Figure 3, divides transfer learning approaches
into instance, feature, parameter, and knowledge-base transfer. Referring to the definition of transfer learning,
these types originate from whether data instances, feature spaces, model parameters, or domain knowledge are
used to bolster the target domain performance. Table 1 summarizes the key themes explored under the transfer
learning methods. A brief background on the themes explored under the solutions perspective is presented in
Section 7 (Appendix). The solution perspective is further classified into supervised and unsupervised approaches,
depending on whether the target domain labels are available.
2.5
Transfer Learning in Sensor-based HAR
The literature on transfer learning is vast [136, 199, 222], where domains like computer vision and natural
language have been known for their extensive explorations of different methodologies. However, performing
transfer learning for sensor-based HAR comes with its unique challenges, which require careful adaptation of the
existing transfer learning methods as well as the development of the new ones.
2.5.1
Lack of Labeled Data. The availability of large and diverse amounts of labeled data is crucial for achieving
generalizability and transferability in machine learning. While large-scale data annotation projects have been
undertaken in other domains [52], annotating sensor data is both time and resource-consuming because of
less interpretability. Moreover, collecting even the unlabeled sensor data is difficult as it comes with logistical
as well as ethical challenges including installation of sensors, recruitment of human subjects, and addressing
their privacy concerns [54]. Even after addressing these concerns, several factors can induce a change in the
underlying distribution of the sensor data like sensor setups, location/position, sensing frequencies, orientation,
user idiosyncrasies, behavior, etc. To this date, there are no large-scale data collection efforts in either wearable
or smart home settings, covering all these sources of variations described above. All these challenges result in
sensor-based HAR datasets being smaller in size, imbalanced in nature, and non-conducive to performing transfer
learning [109, 140].
2.5.2
Noise. Sensor data is inherently noisy. This noise originates from sources like the hardware components
of sensors [126], environmental conditions (autocalibration and placement of the sensor), and the way subjects
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 7 ---
perform activities [139]. Additionally, the other type of noise originates from the correctly sensed data that does
not correspond to the target activity [118]. Since a change in domain is likely to result in a change in the noise
characteristics as well as sources, performing a transfer that addresses this noise variation is a demanding task.
2.5.3
Learning Generalizable Features. It has been observed that deep convolutional neural networks learn
hierarchical features on visual datasets [146], where shallow layers learn more domain-invariant features and
deeper layers learn task-specific features. Such is not the case when it comes to the sensor data because of the
data characteristics [127]. Moreover, it has also been observed that the choice of the domain, in terms of the
variability in the activities, plays a crucial role. Training performed on a more diverse activity set results in
the low-level features being more generalizable [127]. An empirical study designed to test the role of features
indicated that no set of features is optimal across different HAR problems [77]. This makes learning optimal
features under transfer from the available domains a challenge unique to sensor-based HAR.
2.5.4
Sensor Heterogeneity. In a typical transfer learning problem in vision or natural language, despite the
change in domains, the data modality remains constant. However, this assumption is not valid, especially in the
case of HAR in smart homes, where the source and the target domains may contain different numbers and types
of ambient sensors. Even in the case of wearables, sensor heterogeneity can be present in the form of differences
in sensing devices, hardware, sensing frequency, area of coverage, and positions/locations [33]. Tackling this
heterogeneity across domains is yet another unique challenge, where the goal is to find common representation
spaces that are conducive to performing a transfer.
Addressing these challenges requires the use of specialized transfer learning methods for sensor-based HAR.
In this survey, we identify two main application domains in sensor-based HAR: (i) Smart Home HAR and (ii)
Wearable HAR. The narrative of our survey focuses on highlighting the transfer learning approaches and their
relevance in these two application domains, as shown in Figure 1.
3
TRANSFER LEARNING FOR HAR IN SMART HOME SCENARIOS
The idea behind smart homes is to install intelligence into the living spaces for automating day-to-day functional-
ities. In addition to automation, such intelligent spaces are beneficial for healthcare and monitoring purposes
as well, especially for the elderly and at-risk population [11]. Accurate recognition of human activities plays a
crucial role in these applications. To perform HAR in a non-obstrusive way, ambient sensors are embedded into
the physical spaces, which collect data corresponding to state-changes and physical quantities like temperature,
pressure, humidity, etc. Using this data, several works [21, 30] have targeted building HAR frameworks. Despite
their promising performance, these HAR models trained on a specific smart home setting lack transferability [49].
Learning setting-invariant HAR models is extremely relevant in case of smart homes as they typically have
different layouts, sensor installations, sensor locations, and target activities. Collecting large amounts of data,
each time, on such specific settings and training HAR models becomes infeasible in real-life scenarios [84, 85].
Thus, transfer learning for HAR in smart homes is an active research direction. The standard version of this
problem statement of performing transfer consists of a single source 𝐷𝑠and target 𝐷𝑡domain, where the feature
spaces are different, i.e., 𝜒𝑠≠𝜒𝑡. This difference arises from the variations in smart home layouts in terms of
sensors, their locations, modalities, coverage, etc. In a simpler case, the target activities across domains remain
the same, i.e., 𝑌𝑠= 𝑌𝑡[47, 120, 214]. However, in a generic case, both the feature spaces as well as label sets vary
across domains, i.e., 𝜒𝑠≠𝜒𝑡and 𝑌𝑠≠𝑌𝑡[20, 148, 154]. In addition to this, there are several practical challenges
that are tackled in the literature including multi-source transfer, personalized transfer, optimal source selection,
and more. In this section, we describe these challenges, their relevance, and provide details on the approaches
used to address them.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 8 ---
Table 2. Exploration of transfer learning challenges in smart home literature with corresponding source-target dataset
pairs: In this table, we categorize the transfer learning works in terms of the challenges they address and the source-target
dataset pairs on which their experiments are performed. Addressing heterogeneity and task differences across domains are
the most tackled challenges in the literature, whereas, CASAS and Kasteren datasets are the popular choices to perform
experiments. In this table, the "Others" dataset category denotes custom datasets collected specific to some works as well as
the lesser-used publicly available datasets like CASAS Single Resident, PUCK-Parkinson’s, Intel, and TU Darmstadt dataset.
Datasets
Heterogeneous Transfer
Difference in Tasks
Multi-Source Transfer
Personalized Transfer
Optimal Source Selection
CASAS
Apartments
[65, 152–154]
[152–154]
[65, 152–154]
-
-
CASAS HH
[125, 133, 134, 148, 180, 213,
214]
[148, 180]
[133]
-
[134, 213]
CASAS (others)
[46, 50, 67, 75, 170, 171, 210,
211]
[148, 210]
[210]
[67, 150]
-
MIT MAS622J
[20, 46, 47, 58, 211]
[20]
[20]
-
-
MIT PLIA1
[90]
[90, 219]
-
-
-
Ordonez
[141, 187, 196]
[196]
-
-
-
Kasteren
[20, 90, 171, 173, 186, 209–
211]
[20, 90, 91, 209, 210, 219]
[20, 186, 209, 210]
-
-
Others
[66, 90]
[10, 10, 90, 149]
[66]
[13, 14, 55, 121, 151]
[155, 177]
3.1
Heterogeneous Transfer
As mentioned, heterogeneous transfer learning refers to the case where the source and target feature spaces differ,
i.e., 𝜒𝑠≠𝜒𝑡. There are two main interpretations of the term heterogeneous in this context, where the change in
feature space is induced by: (i) a change in sensor modalities across the domains, or (ii) a change in other aspects
(e.g., sensor layout, cardinality, location, and sampling frequency).
There exist sensors that capture data in the discrete (e.g., ON/OFF and OPEN/CLOSE) as well as continuous
(numeric) space (e.g., 21.5, 20, 19.5). Moreover, these sensors often belong to a functional group, where they are
attached to specific objects (e.g., entrance doors) and capture information specific to them (opening and closing).
This set of OPEN/CLOSE readings is different from another set of OPEN/CLOSE readings originating from a
sensor attached to a fridge door. The change in smart home layouts results in an uneven cardinality of sensors
embedded into each meaningful location like kitchen, bathroom, and living space. Therefore, the number of views
available for sensing an activity occurring in (say) a kitchen is often different for different domains. All these
factors complicate the transfer learning process and require special attention to avoid performance degradation.
Specific source-target dataset pairs used in the literature to perform heterogeneous transfer are shown in Table 2.
3.1.1
Approaches. Since the source and the target feature spaces differ in heterogeneous transfer learning, a
transfer of feature spaces is imperative to tackle this challenge. There are two themes of approaches observed
in the relevant works. In the first, a mapping function between the source and the target domain features is
learned [47, 65, 75, 209]. Based on this mapping function, the source model or instances can be used in the target
domain training. In the second theme, a transformation is applied (learned) on both the source and the target
feature spaces to arrive at a common space, where models can be shared across domains [67, 134, 173, 214]. In
this approach, an explicit mapping between source and target feature sets does not take place.
The mapping process can be divided into two parts. First, the goal is to generate common and relevant feature
representations, which is followed by the actual mapping process between these representations. Sensor profiling
is one of the easier ways in which representations for mapping can be constructed. In the profiling-based
approaches, the domain-specific contextual information about the sensors is used. Thus, these approaches can
also be categorized under knowledge base transfer. The profiling can be designed by constructing a sensor
mapping/similarity matrix based on factors like the sensor type, location, attached object, trigger ratio per activity,
and time information [75, 171]. Another way of representing a sensor profile is by using a binary vector, where
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 9 ---
each field denotes a property related to the object to which the sensor is attached, its location, modality, and
its relation to target activities [46]. Assigning ID [134] or labels based on location [213], modality [213], and
functional groups [187] to sensors and matching them to perform mapping is also explored in the literature.
Using semantic [209] and meta-features [196] is another way in which mapping-specific representations
can be constructed. Meta-features can be seen as features of features in the sense that they represent specific
properties of the original data. For example, the average time difference between sensor activations from the
kitchen is a meta-feature, which is independent of the underlying sensor modality (feature set). Meta-features
can be constructed using informed (using annotations) and uninformed (without using annotations) strategies
[66]. Informed meta-features usually depend on sensor-activity co-occurrence, whereas, the uninformed meta-
features could be constructed using statistical measures of sensor activations like frequency and time difference.
Meta-features can also be constructed based on clusters of instances, representing cluster-specific properties
[210]. Semantic features make use of the sensor/feature/domain-specific semantic profiles to generate meaningful
transferable entities. For instance, the number of sensors attached to kitchen doors could be a semantic feature,
which is transferable as well as relevant. In addition to semantic features, domain semantics can also be captured
by ontological approaches that use domain, sensor, and activity ontologies and semantic similarities between
them [211]. Sometimes, meta-features are also constructed similarly to semantic features, using their functionality
information [186].
After generating representations using the discussed techniques, the mapping process can be performed using a
number of techniques. The mapping problem can be visualized as a graph matching problem by using a similarity
metric (as weights) and features/sensors (as nodes). Performing similarity calculations using Jensen–Shannon
divergence (JSD) and graph matching using the Gale-Shapley algorithm is a popular choice in literature [40, 46,
47, 58, 120]. In addition to graph matching, the expectation-maximization (EM) framework is also used to learn
the optimal mapping [153, 154]. Feature mapping can also be solved by performing fuzzy clustering of sensor
activations followed by temporal alignment using the obtained cluster [141]. Another way of reformulating the
mapping problem is by learning a dictionary of over-complete basis vectors via sparse coding [58].
Rather than mapping the entire feature sets, a subset of pivotal features can also be used as a bridge between
the domains. This pivotal feature set can be identified using random forest models trained on source and target
domain data [181]. For calculating the similarity between features from source and target domains, a symmetric
version of Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence is used [90]. Additionally, genetic algorithm and greedy (exhaustive)
approaches for mapping are also explored in the literature [65].
Following the second theme of approaches, where transformations are applied/learned to project the feature
spaces or instances, Procrustes analysis is explored in the literature [67]. It finds a single orthogonal transformation
that minimizes the sum-of-squares distances between all pairs of data instances across domains. A popular theme
among such approaches is to project the feature spaces using neural networks. Word2Vec is a good example for
such approaches, where word embeddings are used as the intermediate feature spaces [214]. Another way of
using Word2Vec is to identify the common sensors across the domains and freeze their projections such that
the remaining projections get aligned accordingly [133]. It is also observed that rather than using the sensor
activations as inputs to the Word2Vec model, simply using the sensor ID can improve the quality of projected
representations [134]. Neural word embeddings can also be used to perform the same functionality as Word2Vec
[20], which is to convert the different feature spaces into a common subspace. After this conversion, different
neural networks are used to further extract transferable features. Architectures including long short term memory
(LSTM) [214], autoencoders (AE) [148], graph AEs [125] based on differential pooling, and bidirectional generative
adversarial networks (Bi-GANs) [173] are used for this purpose.
In the literature, the issue of sensor heterogeneity is also tackled under the fog computing paradigm, where
the communication between individual fogs (smart homes in this case) is possible using the edge devices in the
IoT system [170]. To address the sensor heterogeneity challenge, a metadata description is built for abstracting a
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 10 ---
smart home’s activities. This description is shared with other smart homes in the fog and the target house takes
into consideration this shared metadata information to perform feature mapping using meta features.
3.2
Difference in Tasks
Referring to the definition of a task from Section 2.4, a change in task represents either 𝑌𝑠≠𝑌𝑡or 𝑃(𝑌𝑠|𝑋𝑠) ≠
𝑃(𝑌𝑡|𝑋𝑡). Although the label spaces could be different, there exists an implicit assumption that they are similar
to each other semantically. For example, the activities sleep bed and sleep not bed are similar in terms of the
underlying action performed by the user [154]. The similarity between activities can also be in terms of their
usual location of occurrence. For instance, the activities preparing food and washing dishes both take place in the
kitchen area, which links them semantically in the transfer process [46]. The ultimate goal here is to enable the
HAR system to classify unseen activities with as little supervision as possible. Specific source-target dataset pairs
used in the literature to address task difference are shown in Table 2.
3.2.1
Approaches. The problem of 𝑌𝑠≠𝑌𝑡can be solved using instance and parameter transfer methods. A
straightforward application of instance transfer techniques is via label space transfer, where a mapping between
𝑌𝑠and 𝑌𝑡is learned. One of the simpler ways in which label space transfer can be achieved is by using activity
templates, where similar activities are grouped under one label [153, 154]. This approach requires domain
heuristics, which is why it can also be classified under knowledge-based transfer. Another approach using domain
heuristics is the representation of human activities using semantic attributes, where the similarity between the
predefined and unseen activities is calculated by creating a hierarchical cluster of activity labels generated from
the available datasets [10]. Creating class prototypes also uses domain heuristics, where a prototype is a binary
vector denoting a set of transferable entities [196]. These prototypes can later be used in zero-shot classification
settings. For calculating the similarity between activities, web-knowledge is also used in the literature [91, 219].
Based on these similarity calculations, instance transfer and pseudo labeling can be performed. Another way to
measure the distance between activities is to represent them using neural word embeddings and calculate the
distances in the embedding space [20]. In label space mapping, the use of normalized Google distance (NGD) is
commonplace [90, 180]. The intuition behind using it is to have representations of instances with the same/similar
labels closer to each other in the transformed feature space.
Under the paradigm of parameter sharing, the goal is to reuse the parameters of the classifier model learned on
the source. One way of reusing the parameters is to share classifiers across domains [209]. This can be achieved
by identifying non-confident predictions using least confidence, margin sampling, and entropy measures and
performing feature space mapping to allow the other classifier(s) to perform inference on the non-confident
samples. The final prediction can be obtained by selecting the most certain class label. There have also been works
that attempt learning a generalizable transfer model, which performs ensemble learning and stacked inference to
obtain a model suited for the universal set of activity labels [210]. Parameter sharing can also be performed by
transferring the learned weights directly across domains. An approach following this trend has been performed in
the literature [149], where deep belief networks are used to learn features without supervision using contrastive
divergence. These features are subsequently transferred and finetuned using the available labeled data.
3.3
Multi-source Transfer Learning
Multi-source transfer learning is an extension of the standard transfer learning approach with multiple source
domains 𝐷𝑠1, 𝐷𝑠2, ..., 𝐷𝑠𝑘and a single target domain 𝐷𝑡. Despite having access to additional training data from
multiple source domains, the problem is challenging w.r.t. redundancy handling, the possibility of negative
transfer (the case when transfer learning results in a negative impact on the target domain performance), and
weighting of domain knowledge based on their similarity with the target domain. In the case of smart homes,
there are several datasets (e.g., CASAS [150], Kasteren [188, 189]) that are fully/partially annotated. However, they
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 11 ---
have different sensor installations, smart home layouts, and other setting-specific factors. Therefore, the challenge
lies in learning setting-invariant knowledge from multiple domains and apply it to improve the performance
over the target domain. Specific source-target datasets for performing multi-source transfer are shown in Table 2.
3.3.1
Approaches. Since multi-source transfer learning with 𝑘source domains has the problem of potentially
having 𝑘different feature spaces, feature transfer methods that do not follow the one-on-one transfer approach
can be applied here. For example, methods like meta-features [210], neural word embedding [20], and Word2Vec
[133] can be used to construct a domain-invariant feature space for multiple source and target domains. Following
this step, training on multiple source domains can be carried out using a classifier. LSTM networks are, for
example, explored for this purpose [20, 133].
Another prominent theme to tackle the challenge of multiple source domains is to use an ensemble [65, 153,
154, 210]. The ensemble can be formed by considering individual classifiers for each domain [210] or sensor
modality [65]. For combining the predictions of each individual classifier, a weighted majority voting scheme is
explored in the literature [153, 154]. Stacking is another way in which the predictions can be combined [66, 210].
It uses an additional classifier that takes inputs from the predictions of individual classifiers, and in turn, predicts
the output label. Sharing of classifiers is also a solution to having multiple source datasets [209]. The uncertain
predictions from each source domain can make use of the classifiers trained on the other source domains to
potentially remove the uncertainty.
3.4
Personalized Transfer Learning
Personalization is a special kind of transfer learning problem, where neither the feature space nor the label set
changes, i.e., 𝑋𝑠= 𝑋𝑡and 𝑌𝑠= 𝑌𝑡. The shift in domain is induced by difference in the way human subjects
perform activities, i.e., 𝑃(𝑋𝑠) ≠𝑃(𝑋𝑡) Different subjects have their own tendencies to perform activities. Such
idiosyncrasies result in large variations in the data collected across multiple subjects for the same activity label.
In practical scenarios, building personalized HAR systems in smart homes is always the ultimate goal. Specific
source-target dataset pairs used in the literature for personalization are shown in Table 2.
3.4.1
Approaches. A straightforward way of achieving personalization is by incorporating user feedback into
the recognition system. This can be done via performing user-assisted active learning [121], where data points
corresponding to the most uncertain predictions are requested for annotation by the user. The uncertainty is
measured using a classifier’s lack of confidence and the addition of new (unseen) feature sets. A more sophisticated
user-oriented system has also been proposed [150], where the adaptation is based on using four mechanisms:
direct manipulation (using a user interface), guidance, request, and smart detection.
Although keeping the user in the loop is beneficial, overdoing so may result in an intrusive system, which
is why many approaches try to implicitly achieve personalization. Towards this, generating synthetic data
corresponding to the new user is a viable option. This can be achieved by conducting a user survey (one-time
cost) and using simulators based on a rule-guided system to generate artificial target-subject specific data [13, 14].
The same goal is also achieved by using GANs, which aim at transforming source instances into target instances
by changing their subject-specific characteristics [176].
Personalization can be seen as a multi-view problem, where a view corresponds to the data generated by a
specific subject. Techniques like co-training and co-EM are used in this context [67]. Learning a user-specific HAR
model in a dynamic environment has also been attempted where each iteration consists of a labeling stage by the
current iteration’s model followed by user-assisted active learning [121]. A specialized approach for cross-subject
transfer was proposed [55], where a hierarchical community-online multi-class Bayes point machine is applied
on a single individual. The prior values of this model, originally over the community weights, are replaced by
Gaussian and Gamma posteriors learned from individual-specific data.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 12 ---
3.5
Optimal Source Selection
Selection of the optimal source domain for performing transfer learning can be viewed as an approach to the
multi-source transfer learning problem. However, we separate it out from multi-source transfer as the goal here
is not to incorporate multiple domains, rather choose the most compatible domain to the given target domain.
This approach avoids the possibility of negative transfer, where the performance over the target domain degrades
because of the inclusion of a non-compatible source domain. To perform optimal source selection, datasets shown
in Table 2 are used in the literature.
3.5.1
Approaches. The problem of optimal source selection can be reduced to calculating the (dis)similarity
between domains. This similarity can be measured in terms of an index, which depends on common sensor
positions, types, and their cardinality [213]. A more comprehensive set of factors for calculating the similarity
between domains can be found [177], where additional factors like physical location, sampling rates, number of
residents, and their routines are included.
For measuring domain dissimilarity, a distance measure called H distance is proposed [155], which uses
classifier induced divergence as a proxy for distance between domains. Another way of calculating domain
distances is by using Word2Vec [134]. It starts by selecting 𝑘common sensors among domains based on their
location/object information. Then, Word2Vec is applied on their sensor IDs to obtain their representations. This
projected space is reduced using principal component analysis (PCA) and distances are calculated between all
possible combinations of the reduced projections of the common sensors to obtain a global distance vector for
each house. The domain distance is then calculated using the cosine similarity between these distance vectors.
4
TRANSFER LEARNING FOR HAR USING WEARABLES
The developments in wearable sensing devices like smartphones, smartwatches, and smart clothing have made
it possible to recognize human activities. These devices are integrated with IMU sensors that can collect data
corresponding to human motion in terms of tri-axial acceleration, angular velocity, and magnetic field. Using this
data and the on-device computing power, machine learning models are deployed to perform activity inference. A
significant amount of research in the wearable HAR field is focused on training these models and improving
their performance under various settings [113, 139]. In real-world scenarios, these settings can vary in terms of
factors like the sensor devices used, their on-body position, cardinality, the intended user(s) of the HAR system,
target activities to recognize, compute platforms, etc.
The need for transfer learning in these wearable HAR systems arises from such variability in settings. For
example, a machine learning model trained on a sports activity dataset collected from a group of children using an
ankle-worn IMU sensor cannot be directly reused to infer office activities performed by adults using a smartwatch.
The fact that data collection and annotation for every such setting to train the activity recognition models from
scratch is infeasible makes it even more compelling to explore transfer learning for achieving generalizability.
The transfer learning literature in wearable HAR focuses on the challenges presented by one or more of these
factors of variability.
A change in the sensor device, number, position, sensing frequency, or modality introduces heterogeneity
in the transfer learning problem. With the availability of multiple annotated source settings, the challenge of
leveraging them without consequently degrading the HAR performance also becomes relevant. In some cases,
the target setting may dynamically change, so that the underlying HAR framework needs to be continually
updated to keep up with such changing environments. Moreover, instead of an on-device system, there may be a
requirement for a distributed or federated setup. All these challenges are introduced by a change in the sensing
platform. In terms of the activities to recognize, the source and target settings can vary in terms of their HAR
task. Also, regarding the users of the HAR system, there may exist a requirement for the system to perform well
for a specific set of users, which calls for personalized HAR systems. Finally, some works also focus on measuring
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 13 ---
the performance of the HAR systems under a transfer learning setup. In this section, we describe these challenges,
their relevance, and provide details on the approaches used to address them.
4.1
Heterogeneous Transfer
The interpretation of the term heterogeneous in the context of transfer learning is based on the feature spaces
across the domains being different, i.e., 𝜒𝑠≠𝜒𝑡. In the case of wearable sensors, this difference arises from
factors like sensor modality, cardinality, sensor position, device types, sensing frequency, etc. Based on these
factors, we classify this heterogeneity into three types: (i) m-heterogeneity (due to a change in sensor modality),
(ii) p-heterogeneity (due to a change in sensor position), and (iii) d-heterogeneity (due to a change in device
aspects). The m-heterogeneity in wearable HAR typically occurs when other data modalities like RGB videos,
motion capture, and web data (text) are used to bolster the IMU-based transfer. The intention behind this added
heterogeneity is to capitalize on the large datasets or pre-trained models available in related domains to learn the
motion or activity-specific information that is not specific to the IMU sensor modality. In contrast to this, the p
and d-heterogeneities are inherent to the transfer learning problems, and hence, must be addressed. Out of these
two, the p-heterogeneity has been observed to be more challenging as different kinds of movement patterns are
recorded when the sensors are attached to different body parts. To address these heterogeneities, several works
have used source-target pairs based on the datasets shown in Table 3. As many works target addressing more
than one heterogeneities, we categorize the works based on their focus of evaluation. Also, all the works deal with
the d-heterogeneity, hence, we catalog only those works under it that do not address the p or m-heterogeneities.
4.1.1
Approaches for addressing m-heterogeneity. The introduction of m-heterogeneity into the transfer learning
is done by using datasets or pre-trained models from other modalities. The goal here is to reuse the modality-
independent information from domains where either the datasets are massive or other crucial information is
present. In the literature, other modalities like human pose [19, 135, 138], images [18], videos [22, 109, 135],
contextual data (Wi-Fi, bluetooth, GPS) [92], text [114, 198] are leveraged along with the IMU-based recognition.
Human pose information is used by placing virtual sensors on the skinned multi-person linear (SMPL) mesh
surface and using forward kinematic and finite differences techniques to generate virtual IMU data [207]. This
virtual data, along with the real IMU data, can be used for training the target HAR system. Videos are also a
useful data modality considering the dataset sizes, availability of pre-trained models, and the ability to generate
virtual IMU data from it. In terms of the pre-trained models specifically, they can be used to make predictions on
video streams, thereby complementing the sensor-stream decision along with it [147]. Without using pre-trained
models, video data can be used along with sensor data by learning a multi-input-multi-output mapping between
data sources based on QR factorization [22]. However, when both video and IMU data streams are not available
simultaneously, a more suitable approach is to generate virtual IMU data [109]. Some methods also use the human
pose and video modalities together by converting the spatio-temporal data into discrete word representation
followed by LSTM-based projection onto a common feature space [135].
In addition to videos, the image modality has also been used, where pre-trained models on ImageNet are
transferred for IMU-based recognition [18, 81]. This is done by finetuning them on IMU data using continuous
wavelet transforms such as horizontal concatenation, acceleration magnitude, and pixel-wise axes-averaging [18].
Another popular choice for modality is the text data, which is used as an additional data source as well as a mode
to generate virtual IMU data. When used as a data source, it needs to be projected on the same feature space as
that of the sensor data, which is achieved using matrix factorization with maximizing the empirical likelihood
[198]. For virtual IMU data generation, recent works have used large language models to generate prompts that
are fed to a CLIP based model to convert them to 3D human motion sequences [114]. These motion sequences can
be converted to virtual IMU data using inverse kinematics. Along with these popular data modalities, where large
datasets and pre-trained models are readily available, contextual data originating from WiFi, bluetooth, and GPS
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 14 ---
Table 3. Exploration of transfer learning challenges of sensor heterogeneity and personalization in wearable HAR literature
with corresponding source-target dataset pairs: In this table, we categorize the transfer learning works in terms of the
challenges they address and the source-target dataset pairs on which their experiments are performed. The challenges of
p-heterogeneity and personalization are largely addressed in the literature, whereas, PAMAP2, OPPORTUNITY, and DSADS
datasets are the popular choices to perform experiments. In this table, the "Others" dataset category denotes custom datasets
collected specific to some works as well as the lesser-used publicly available datasets like Cooking, DAS, MHAD, UFO, DIP,
SAD, MobiFall, RealDisp, Oulu, JSI-FOS, Sussex-Huawei, CogAge, Capture-24, Wetlab, Daphnet, HASC, CASAS MAR/YA,
MEx, iPodTouch, ExtraSensory, SHL, uWave, DUMD, ANSAMO, TRA, UCI-HAPT, and MoST.
Datasets
m-Heterogeneity
p-Heterogeneity
d-Heterogeneity
Personalization
HHAR
-
[7, 36, 48, 63, 78, 79, 103, 106, 165, 184]
[143, 166, 200]
[48, 63, 64, 95, 117, 166, 200, 202]
PAMAP2
[15, 16, 18, 19, 109, 114, 206]
[7, 15, 16, 23, 24, 34–36, 43, 57, 63, 78,
79, 86, 99, 104, 107, 122, 123, 172, 184,
190, 194, 195, 206, 208, 212, 215, 221]
[71, 111, 143]
[8, 24, 34, 35, 60, 63, 123, 145, 156, 175,
178, 194, 212, 215]
OPPORTUNITY
[19, 86, 109, 115, 127, 206]
[34–36, 43, 59, 63, 99, 105, 110, 127,
160, 162, 163, 194, 195, 206, 212]
[71, 111]
[34, 35, 63, 93, 144, 163, 168, 175, 178,
194, 212]
Mobiact
-
[48, 78, 79, 165, 184]
[143]
[48, 142]
RealWorld
[109, 114, 206]
[36, 48, 184, 206]
[143]
[48, 93]
DSADS
-
[34, 35, 43, 57, 104, 122, 123, 172, 194,
195, 212, 215, 221]
-
[34, 35, 60, 61, 123, 145, 169, 194, 212,
215]
Myogym
-
[78, 79, 184]
-
-
MHEALTH
-
[43, 78, 79, 104, 184, 190, 208]
-
[178]
WISDM
-
[104, 107, 108, 163, 165, 172]
[97]
[17, 117, 124, 163, 164]
UCI
[81]
[41, 103, 104, 122, 123, 165]
[95, 143, 200]
[17, 53, 56, 80, 123, 144, 200, 202]
SmartSock
[15, 16]
[15, 16]
-
[60]
SDA
-
[105, 160, 162, 163]
-
[163, 164]
MotionSense
-
[78, 79, 165, 184]
[143]
-
SKODA
[81, 86, 127]
[59, 86, 127]
[71]
-
USC-HAD
[81, 114]
[78, 104, 122, 123]
-
[56, 123, 145]
AMASS
[138, 206, 207]
[206]
-
-
UniMiB
-
[104, 165]
-
[17, 144]
KU-HAR
-
[106–108]
[137]
-
Others
[15, 16, 22, 92, 94, 115, 135, 138, 198]
[7, 9, 15, 16, 23, 24, 41, 78, 79, 94, 98, 99,
103–105, 158–
160, 162, 163, 197, 208, 221]
[71, 95, 97, 111, 137, 166, 200, 216, 217]
[8, 17, 24, 45, 64, 68, 72, 73, 76, 87, 95,
112, 116, 117, 119, 163, 166, 174, 175,
182, 200, 203, 204, 217]
is also used in the literature. A self-supervised incremental learning approach is explored to use this data that uses
adaptive resonance theory based feature learning [92]. Within the wearable modality itself, m-heterogeneity can
arise when additional data sources like eye-movement and strength measurements are also tracked in addition to
the IMU components. To address this, pre-training based on sensor modality classification is performed [115].
4.1.2
Approaches for addressing p-heterogeneity. To address the p-heterogeneity, several instance, feature, and
parameter transfer methods have been proposed. Under the instance transfer methods, instance mapping, instance
weighing, label propagation, data augmentation, and source domain selection are the commonly explored themes.
Instance mapping refers to a method that learns a mapping function between source and target data instances
or their substructures (clusters or subsequences). In the literature, mapping of clusters has been preferred, which
is performed based on maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [215], Wasserstein distance [106, 108], and optimal
transport methods [122]. The general idea behind instance weighing is to assign importance to source data
instances, in the form of weights, to denote their usefulness in the transfer process. One way in which the
weighing process can be performed is based on the closeness of the data instances. Methods like kernel mean
matching (KMM) [23, 24], nearest neighbor weighing [23, 24], and MMD-based weighing [194] follow this
approach. Weighing can also be performed based on norms like 𝐿2,1 matrix norm [41] and loss functions like
domain discrimination loss [212]. The 𝐿2,1 matrix norm is a sequential application of the 𝑙2 and 𝑙1 norms, which
acts as a regularizer, whereas, the domain discrimination loss depends on the inference of a domain classifier in
terms of its ability to distinguish between domains (where higher confusion represents more similar data points).
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 15 ---
In label propagation, the aim is to learn a mapping between source and target label sets using target and source
data instances. A well-established way of mapping labels is to cluster the source and target instances and perform
graph matching [159]. In addition to clusters, their properties like centroid distances for each data instance are
also used in the literature, followed by affinity graph based propagation of labels [105]. Another similarity graph
based label propagation technique constructs the graph by assuming data instances as nodes and the Gaussian
kernel similarity between them as edge weights [160]. After constructing this graph, an iterative label refinement
is performed, where in each iteration, the nodes take a fraction of label information from their neighborhood and
maintain a distribution until it stabilizes.
As seen earlier, instance weighting assigns importance scores (weights) to individual data instances. The source
domain selection approach follows a similar suit, but for domains, in order to choose compatible domains for
performing transfer in a multi-source setting. Several distance measures like stratified distance [43], global &
subdomain distances [221] and A distance, semantic distance, & cosine similarity based kinetic distances [195]
are proposed to measure the domain similarity. The goal of using data augmentations in instance transfer is to
generate target-like data instances by applying transformations. In addition to the basic data transformations [36],
the literature also consists of works that aim at attribute-specific and semantically aware augmentation techniques
to follow domain constraints [123]. Class augmentations is another such method that applies transformations on
the data instances using metadata to generate gender and sensor position specific target instances [104].
Since p-heterogeneity causes the feature spaces to be different, feature transfer techniques are largely explored.
The conventional feature transfer approaches for addressing p-heterogeneity include transfer component analysis
(TCA) [23, 24], subspace alignment (SA) [23, 24], hierarchical clustering [110], and transferrable feature selection
[98]. TCA uses the MMD measure to learn transfer components in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. In SA,
the subspaces formed by the top-𝑘eigenvectors of source and target domains are used in learning the mapping
between them. Hierarchical clustering is a feature agglomeration technique that recursively merges similar
features together in clusters, minimizing the variance within each cluster for common feature space learning. In
the transferrable feature selection method [98], the mutual information between the features and class labels is
calculated to rank the features followed by the removal of redundant features based on the Pearson correlation
coefficient. On the remaining features, a greedy feature selection method is employed that incrementally adds
the high-ranked features until validation performance starts degrading.
In addition to these conventional approaches, neural networks are also used to project source and target
data instances onto a common feature space. To guide the training of these neural networks, loss functions like
adversarial domain discrimination/confusion loss [34, 36, 221], contrastive loss [172], MMD loss [41, 43, 57, 195,
221], triplet loss [9, 212], 𝐿2,1 matrix norm loss [41], KL divergence loss [103], and large margin loss [123] are
used in the literature. The domain discrimination/confusion loss is calculated by performing adversarial training,
where the model tries to classify the domain of the input data representations. If the model fails to correctly
classify the domain, it acts as in indicator that the resultant features are domain agnostic. Contrastive loss is
calculated on a batch of inputs, where the projections of the positive pairs (augmentations of the same data
instance) are brought closer and vice versa. In triplet loss, a triplet of an anchor, positive, and negative sample is
considered. The projection of the positive from the anchor is then brought closer and the negative samples are
projected farther. While the other loss functions rely on only the correct predictions, the large margin loss takes
into account the confidence in the predictions as well, where less confident predictions are penalized.
Under the parameter transfer methods, the commonly used approach is to perform pre-training on the source
domain and then finetuning the learned model on the target domain. Several neural network architectures like
convolutional neural networks (CNN) [9, 48, 99, 103, 163, 190], gated recurrent units (GRU) [107, 108], CNN-LSTM
[195], CNN-GRU [106], variational autoencoders (VAE) [7], Bi-GAN [172], graph neural networks (GNN) [208],
and attention units (transformers) [9, 63, 221] are used in the model architecture. Here, predefined layers of the
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 16 ---
neural network (typically the lower layers) are transferred over to the target domain. This transfer can take place
in a cascaded manner, where trainable layers are added and transferred one by one [59].
Ensemble learning in parameter transfer uses individual base models trained on source domain(s) towards
target inference. There are several ways in which the decisions of individual models can be combined. Several
methods like learning a gating function [158, 162], majority voting [43, 194], and discounting proportional
conflict redistribution (PCR5) rule [57] are proposed in the literature to combine the individual decisions. Another
parameter transfer approach is knowledge distillation, where a smaller student model learns to mimic a larger
teacher model. This training process can be guided using loss functions like hard cross entropy and soft knowledge
distillation loss, which is the difference between the logits of the source and the target models [105]. This teacher-
student framework is also combined with a self-training paradigm [184]. The teacher model training on the
source domain is performed in a supervised manner, which is used on the target domain to generate soft pseudo
labels. The student model is then trained using the labeled source and pseudo-labeled target data, along with a
self-supervised loss. Self-training is also performed using extreme learning machines (ELM) as the base classifier,
where high-confidence pseudo labels are used in an iterative manner.
Recently, self-supervised learning has proven to be an effective way of performing pre-training. It uses the
unlabeled data itself to generate a supervisory signal on which the models are pre-trained. The pre-training
takes place on the source domain, whereas, the finetuning takes place on the target domain. Pretext tasks like
multitask learning, masked reconstruction, contrastive predictive coding (CPC), enhanced CPC, autoencoders
(AE), SimCLR, SimSiam, and BYOL are explored in the literature in the transfer learning setup [78, 79, 165].
4.1.3
Approaches for addressing d-heterogeneity. Since d-heterogeneity does not assume different sensing modal-
ities or positions across domains, the source and target feature spaces are more similar to each other than in
the case of m or p-heterogeneity. Thus, instance and parameter transfer techniques are preferred over feature
transfer to deal with d-heterogeneity. Only a handful of approaches like feature clustering [111] and MMD loss
based intermediate feature space construction [95, 97] are used in the relevant literature
Boosting is one of the common ways in which data instances can be weighted. Methods like AdaBoost
[200] maintain a distribution of weights over the data instances, which gets updated based on the performance
(misclassification) of the weak learner. Instance mapping in the format of mapping subsequences using brute
force, clustering-based, and motif-based methods is also explored in the literature [168]. It uses normalized
cross-correlation (NCC) as the underlying similarity measure.
Among the parameter transfer methods, the approach of pretrain-then-finetune is greatly applicable in this
scenario as the underlying feature spaces are not drastically different. On IMU datasets, pre-training using
well-established architectures like Inception-ResNet, DeepConvLSTM, HART, and MobileHART architectures
and finetuning in leave one dataset out manner has been performed [143]. In addition, other custom architectures
like spectro-temporal ResNet [71], VGG [104], and customized CNNs [97, 137] are also used. A slight variation to
this approach by replacing the finetuning step with a clustering-based inference has been tested in the literature.
In particular, classifiers like ELMs [216] and decision trees [217] are trained on the source domain and used to
perform initial inference on the target domain. The most confident predictions are then used as initial cluster
centers for performing K-means clustering followed by label propagation until convergence. A typical parameter
transfer framework assumes a direct sharing of learned weights across domains. However, soft parameter sharing
assumes a non-linear relation between the transferred parameters, which is suitable for domain shifts [95].
4.1.4
Approaches for addressing p and m-heterogeneity. Out of the entire collection, only a handful of approaches
target and perform evaluations for addressing both p and m-heterogeneities. ActiLabel is one such approach,
where the transfer learning problem is formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem [15, 16] to tackle both
heterogeneities. It aims at learning a mapping from the groups of similar target instances, called core clusters, to
known activity classes from the source domain. Using it, a dependency graph is created on which a min-cost
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 17 ---
mapping is performed for source-to-target inference. In another approach, the challenge of p and m-heterogeneity
is addressed using disentangled representation learning between different modalities and positions using mutual
information based regularization [206]. Moreover, an additional data source of motion capture is also leveraged
using an SMPL model to generate virtual IMU data. Instead of addressing both the p and m-heterogeneity at the
same time, it can also be addressed one at a time using a multi-factor transfer learning approach [94]. In this
approach, the multi-factor domain variance is decoupled in a transfer path based on the available domains, i.e.,
rather than transferring from 𝑆→𝑇, a transfer path 𝑆→𝐷1 →𝐷2 →... →𝑇is constructed. This is achieved
by selecting the modalities that are more robust for each intermediate transfer. To perform the intermediate
transfer, a parameter transfer approach is explored, which uses a multi-task model with modality-specific input
and output layers to perform inference on the intermediate domain data. The high-confidence predictions are
then used for pseudo-labeling the intermediate domain, to eventually re-train the multi-task model.
In addition to proposing such new frameworks, the literature also consists of works that perform an analysis of
existing approaches for addressing the p and m-heterogeneity. Specifically, the analysis of transferring different
layers of the CNN [127] and Deep ConvLSTM [86] networks in terms of their freezing, re-training, and re-
initialization has been performed.
4.2
Personalized Transfer Learning
One goal of performing transfer learning is to achieve generalization. It refers to the ability of a model to perform
well in diverse settings. However, in real-world deployments, personalization is a key requirement. Personalization
can be viewed as a challenge of building a HAR system targeted for a single user (e.g. users of a smartwatch or a
smartphone) or a set of users with common properties (e.g. adults in a gym). Specifically, it targets the the scenario
of 𝑃(𝑋𝑠) ≠𝑃(𝑋𝑡) while 𝜒𝑠may (not) be equal to 𝜒𝑡. This difference in the marginal probability distributions
arises because of the variations in the activities performed by different users, owing to their idiosyncrasies. To
address this issue, several works have used source-target pairs based on the datasets shown in Table 3.
4.2.1
Approaches. Before discussing the approaches, we note that many of the methods presented below address
the issue of 𝑃(𝑋𝑠) ≠𝑃(𝑋𝑡) in addition to 𝜒𝑠≠𝜒𝑡. This is because the issues of personalization and heterogeneity
are typically present simultaneously in real-world settings. Thus, many of the methods used for addressing
feature space heterogeneity are also used for personalization purposes.
Under instance transfer, such common approaches include: (i) instance mapping and label propagation of
sensor subsequences [168] or clusters [215] using NCC and MMD based similarity measures, respectively, (ii)
label propagation on clusters using graph matching algorithms [60], (iii) standard [64] and semantically-aware
[123] data augmentations, (iv) synthetic data generation in adversarial setup [175], and (v) instance weighing
based on KMM [24, 116], nearest neighbor weighing [24], and domain discrimination loss [93, 212]. In addition
to these, different approaches following the same themes are present in the literature. For instance, instance
mapping using cosine similarity [203] and label propagation on data clusters using radial basis function (RBF)
kernel similarity [142] are explored. The application of an RBF kernel constraints the similarity measurements in
the range between 0 and 1 by measuring distances in exponential terms. Instance weighting based on metrics
like log-likelihood function [76] and meta classification loss [93] is also tested. The meta classification loss is
calculated by applying the standard loss functions on the transformed feature space for only the high-confidence
pseudo labels generated by the classifier.
There have also been some instance transfer works that follow themes different than the ones mentioned. For
example, the metadata corresponding to physical, lifestyle, and sensor aspects of the source/target settings is
used to create a similarity network, which is used in the boosting process [112]. Optimal source selection, in
terms of the most compatible user, is another such theme. Meta features like predictability of activities using
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 18 ---
nearest neighbor classifier, Shannon entropy based diversity, frequency of activities, and pairwise dissimilarity
between distributions of individuals are used in this selection process [174].
Similar to the case of instance transfer, several feature transfer approaches are used to address the challenges
of personalization as well as feature heterogeneity. Such approaches include: (i) conventional methods like TCA
and SA [24, 116] and (ii) neural network induced feature space projections, guided by loss functions like domain
discrimination/classification loss [34, 35, 63, 145, 178, 204], MMD-based loss [57, 95, 145, 178, 194], triplet loss
[212], contrastive loss [204], and large margin loss [123]. Apart from these loss functions, the Jensen–Shannon
divergence (JSD) loss is also used in intermediate feature space construction [64] for personalization. It is a
symmetric as well as bounded version of the KL divergence.
Correlation alignment (CORAL) is a conventional feature transfer method used for personalization that
minimizes the distance between the covariance matrices of the source and target feature vectors [116]. Unlike
CORAL, which works on source and target feature spaces, locally linear embedding (LLE) considers only the
𝑘-nearest neighbors around each data instance and tries to reconstruct each data point linearly using this
neighborhood [169]. In particular, LLE learns a weight matrix denoting reconstruction weights corresponding to
each data instance pair. The corresponding optimization problem is solved using singular value decomposition
(SVD) and eigenvector-based techniques. Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) is a hierarchical model that is commonly
used for topic modeling, where documents are modeled by assuming a multinomial distribution over latent topics,
which are further modeled using a similar distribution over words. In the case of wearable sensor data, because
of its multidimensional nature and continuous feature spaces, making the likelihood assumptions in LDA is not
only infeasible but also prone to overfitting due to a large number of parameters. Thus, AdaBoost is used as
proxy to calculate the predictive likelihood in LDA towards performing feature space transfer [200, 202].
In addition to these well-established methods, feature space transfer for personalization has also been achieved
using a few customized approaches. One such approach performs supervised locality preserving projection (SLPP)
to map source and target data on a common subspace such that the same class instances are mapped closer [68].
This is achieved by creating an adjacency graph and solving an eigenvalue problem that incorporates smoothness
and class-compactness terms. Another approach applies a transformation on the source space that minimizes a
scaled distance between projected source and target instances [80]. The scaling factor in this case is the confidence
of the classifier in predicting the activity label. In addition to these transformation-based approaches, semantic
feature space representation using activity attributes is also explored in the literature [45]. These attributes
include key movement patterns like arm-up, squat-stand, etc.
Under parameter transfer approaches, the pretrain-then-finetune theme has been largely employed using neural
network architectures like multi-layer perceptions (MLP) [142], AE [178], CNN [17, 48, 142, 163, 164], CNN-LSTM
[168], Bayesian CNN [8], and spatial transformers [63]. A variation to this theme by replacing the finetuning
process with clustering-based label assignment is tested [217]. In the pretraining aspect, several training strategies
like model agnostic meta-learning [72, 73], soft parameter sharing [39, 95], domain adaptive batch normalization
[124], joint training [39], and disentangled feature learning [144] are explored in the literature.
Model agnostic meta learning presents an avenue, where different HAR tasks are constructed by sampling
data across activities and subjects from the available datasets [72, 73]. Then, the target task is matched with
one (or few) of the existing tasks using similarity measures based on mean distance measurements. Domain
adaptive batch normalization is based on the fact that the batch normalization layer encodes domain-specific
information. The idea of batch normalization is to keep the input distribution to each layer constant by replacing
the output activations of previous layers with their standardized values. Thus, to perform transfer, instead of
using exponentially weighted average to compute statistics, the entire test domain data is used to impose the
same distribution across source and target domains [124]. Thus, the network can then produce representations in
a subspace where both source and target distributions are similar.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 19 ---
Table 4. Exploration of transfer learning challenges of multi-source training, dynamic environments, task difference, dis-
tributed/federated setups, and performance evaluations in wearable HAR literature with corresponding source-target dataset
pairs: We categorize the transfer learning works in terms of the challenges they address and the source-target dataset pairs
on which their experiments are performed. In this table, the "Others" dataset category denotes custom datasets collected
specific to some works as well as the lesser-used publicly available datasets like MotionSense, HASC, MyoGym, USC-HAD,
Wetlab, Skoda, UniMiB, uWave, COSAR, KU-HAR, SPAD, Bilkent, Daphnet, WHARF, RealDisp, and Capture 24.
Datasets
Multi-Source Transfer
Dynamic Environments
Difference in Tasks
Performance Measurement
HHAR
[143, 205, 218]
[157]
[54, 78]
[54, 78]
PAMAP2
[34, 35, 57, 107, 143, 179, 218]
[89, 208]
[54, 78]
[54, 78, 82]
OPPORTUNITY
[34, 35, 179, 218]
[3, 5, 201]
[27, 59, 62, 101, 102]
-
DSADS
[34, 35, 57]
[89]
[131]
-
Mobiact
[143]
-
[78]
[78]
RealWorld
[143]
[89]
[54]
[54]
UCI
[143, 205]
[53]
[100]
-
MHealth
[179]
-
[78, 132, 208]
[78, 82]
WISDM
[107, 205, 218]
[5]
[101, 102, 108]
-
DAS
-
-
[101, 102, 132]
-
Custom
[107, 112, 143, 179, 205, 218]
[3, 5, 157, 161]
[27, 45, 59, 78, 108, 208]
[78, 82]
In the joint training framework, different tasks like HAR and subject recognition can simultaneously be
optimized [39]. The subject recognition task enables the HAR model to extract subject-specific features that
are essential for personalization. Disentanglement refers to learning features that correspond to underlying
independent factors. One way of measuring disentanglement is via correlation, which is minimized [144]. However,
naively applying disentanglement methods to sequential models may intensify the KL vanishing problem. Thus,
an evidence lower bound decomposition strategy for disentanglement is proposed in the literature [117]. It follows
a multi-level disentanglement approach, covering both individual latent factors and group semantic segments.
In addition to these, many conventional approaches like self-training [119], co-training [119], active learning
[8, 45, 119, 182], ensemble learning [57, 156, 205], and probabilistic Bayes-optimal classifiers [56] are also used
for personalization. In the active learning frameworks, the selection of data instances for training is performed
based on least confidence [45], margins in predictions [45], maximum entropy [45], and user feedback [182].
Among the ensemble-based methods, techniques are explored that target training of the ensemble, as well as
inference based on it. In addition to setting-specific training of the individual classifiers, their loss functions
can also be complemented with KL divergence between the label distributions of source and target domains
to perform domain adaptation [205]. Another strategy to perform additional training of the ensemble is to
update only the weights assigned to each individual component based on unseen data [156]. For inference in
ensembles, techniques like majority voting [156] and PCR5 [57] are commonplace. A novel inference technique,
called calibration [87], is designed for learning a personal model, where the goal is to select the best-performing
individual classifiers per activity or subject to match the target conditions. Under probabilistic Bayes-optimal
classifiers, a hierarchical multi-class Bayes point machine is used for performing transfer from a community to an
individual subject [56]. A Bayes point machine learns 𝑘linear discriminant functions for a 𝑘-class classification
problem, where the goal is to minimize average error marginalized over the entire sampling of data instances.
Under the transfer learning setup, the prior values of this model, originally over the community weights, are
replaced by Gaussian and Gamma posteriors learned from individual-specific data.
4.3
Multi-Source Transfer Learning
One of the biggest challenges in the domain of wearable HAR is the unavailability of large-scale datasets,
where generalized models can be learned and deployed across diverse settings. One way to address this is to
train the HAR models on a number of small-scale datasets. However, based on the previous discussions, the
factor of heterogeneity induced by sensor modalities, sensing positions, device aspects, and human subjects
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 20 ---
makes it difficult to leverage these datasets in a straightforward manner. Thus, the research on using multiple
source datasets involves scalable feature transfer techniques that can handle multiple (number and type of)
heterogeneities at the same time, while avoiding negative transfer. To address this challenge, several works have
used source-target pairs based on the datasets shown in Table 4.
4.3.1
Approaches. Since most of the conventional feature transfer techniques (e.g., TCA, SA, and CORAL) are
designed for a single-source transfer learning setup, the use of neural network based training frameworks is
preferred for multi-source feature transfer. This includes the exploration of various architectures (e.g., ResNet,
DeepConvLSTM, HART, and MobileHART) [143], loss functions (e.g., domain discrimination loss [34, 35, 179, 205],
MMD-based loss [57, 179], and self-distillation loss [179]), and training strategies [107, 143, 218]. While these
frameworks aim to arrive at a common feature space, they achieve it by sharing parameters (i.e., having common
feature extractors), which can also be seen as a parameter transfer method. The loss functions like MMD and
domain discrimination loss are calculated between each pair of source and target domains and used to formulate
a global loss function that is jointly optimized. The self-distillation loss is applied in a teacher-student framework.
In that, a global model is pre-trained that acts as the teacher, and the KL divergence between the predictions of
this teacher and individual student model is used as a loss function [179].
A training strategy similar to cross-validation, called leave-one-dataset-out, is explored, where all the datasets
except one are used for pre-training followed by finetuning on the remaining one [143]. For handling differences
across domains in terms of their tasks (activity label sets), the pre-training can be performed by classifying the
target activities into basic and complex types [218]. The data corresponding to the basic activities, which are
common across domains, can then be used to perform pre-training. In standard pre-training setups, it is often
assumed that all the layers of the neural network architecture are updated. However, in a multi-source setup,
this policy can incur significant costs, which can be reduced by performing standard pre-training on one source
dataset followed by updating only the classification layers for the remaining ones [107]. In neural network based
multi-source frameworks, the features corresponding to individual source domains can be concatenated to deliver
a single inference by the HAR model. However, it is also possible to build an ensemble framework by considering
individual source classifiers as building blocks. In the literature, one such technique is explored, where a weighted
combination of individual source classifiers based on the perplexity scores between features is used to perform
inference [34].
Apart from feature and parameter transfer techniques, an instance transfer technique based on similarity-
sensitive boosting is also used in a multi-source setup [112]. The similarity between instances is calculated using
similarity networks based on physical, lifestyle, and sensor-related metadata.
4.4
Difference in Tasks
The challenge of task difference across domains refers to a change in the activity label set, i.e., 𝑌𝑠≠𝑌𝑡, or
their conditional distribution, i.e., 𝑃(𝑌𝑠|𝑋𝑠) ≠𝑃(𝑌𝑡|𝑋𝑡). The origin of this problem lies in the data collection
protocols, where the data instances are annotated with only a specific set of activities, for example, biking, sitting,
stairs up, stairs down, standing, and walking. This process results in two main issues. First, the human subjects
perform many additional movements, in addition to the activity with which the data instances are annotated.
In some cases, this results in the data instances for the same activities being very different [139]. Second, some
activities like walking and nordic walking, while being different, are very similar to each other. Thus, to perform
a transfer where activity sets differ, it is important to learn data representations that are invariant to the activity
labels. Similar to the case of task difference in smart home settings, there exists an implicit assumption that the
activities across domains are similar in terms of semantics or the underlying motion patterns. To incorporate task
differences across domains, several works have used source-target pairs based on the datasets shown in Table 4.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 21 ---
4.4.1
Approaches. The main requirement for performing a transfer across different tasks is to have learned
more generalized activity-invariant data representations. One way of achieving this goal is to have a feature
representation that is suitable for such transfer. Semantic feature representation is one such way in which
data can be represented [44, 45]. Semantic attributes can be seen as activity descriptors, e.g., arm up, sitting on
table, etc. Since the underlying assumption in this transfer ensures the activities across domains are similar,
common semantic attributes are more likely to exist, which can enable the transfer learning process. While
semantic space representation relies on the manual designing of relevant attributes, neural networks are capable
of extracting transferable features without any hard coding. AE [101, 102], VAE [62], GNN [208], and models
based on convolutional and recurrent layers like DeepTransHAR [108] and DeepConvLSTM [59] are used in the
literature to extract such features.
In addition to these broader approaches, specialized methods are also explored in the literature to tackle
the problem of task difference. For instance, the multi-class task difference problem is simplified into multiple
one-vs-all binary classification problems [131]. The inference is then performed by combining the predictions of
individual classifiers based on the highest confidence measure. This approach helps in detecting unseen classes
based on low confidence values among all binary classifiers while avoiding false positives. Unseen classes during
transfer can also be recognized using anomaly detection followed by clustering [100]. Anomaly detection helps
in identifying the negative instances that may represent unseen activities. Performing clustering using such
negative instances followed by label propagation using a majority voting based approach results in an instance
transfer approach designed to identify similar as well as unseen activities across domains.
The idea of semantic space representation is extended in the literature [132], where classifiers are trained on
the existing as well as the semantic feature space. In case the target data instance belongs to an unseen class, the
attribute-based classifiers are used. A slight variation in semantic space representation is explored in the activity
space via partonomy-based transfer [28], where activities are broken into components that can be combined
to form unseen activities. To do so, the data instances are segmented at low-movement points followed by the
extraction of statistical features and training of a conditional random field (CRF) model to detect composite
activities. Another unsupervised representation learning approach useful in this scenario is sparse coding [27]
that tries to learn an over-complete set of feature vectors. This is performed by formulating an optimization
problem based on reducing the reconstruction error and increasing the sparsity in the learned vectors in the
codebook learning phase. Later, a classifier is trained by identifying clusters within the learned codebook and
selecting the most informative basis vectors from the cluster to learn the classifier. Self-supervised learning has
also been explored to learn task-independent features [78]. In the pretraining step, it constructs a pretext task
using the unlabeled data itself to learn features that are later reused in the finetuning step.
The use of other data modalities for recognizing the unseen activities has been explored in the literature. In
particular, the features extracted from IMU data can be used for generating synthetic 2D skeletal maps in an
adversarial framework, where the inference can be performed on the skeletal data using pre-trained models [62].
This approach leverages the availability of data and pre-trained models from another domain to complement
sensor-based transfer learning for HAR.
4.5
Dynamic Environments
The standard transfer learning setup assumes a change in the feature space or task across domains only once.
Thus, most of the transfer learning frameworks are trained only once to address the feature space heterogeneity,
user variation, or difference in tasks. However, in real-world scenarios, a target environment is likely to undergo
a change in factors like sensor positions (smartphone from left to right pocket), target users, task differences,
etc. To perform HAR in such dynamic environments, transfer learning needs to be performed iteratively using
methods that are capable of quickly adapting to the new target setting. A typical framework for performing such
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 22 ---
a transfer involves training a base model and updating it periodically with encountering a change in domain. In
the literature, several works have addressed this challenge using source-target pairs based on the datasets shown
in Table 4. Below, we present a subset of approaches addressing this challenge. A more comprehensive survey of
transfer learning methods for dynamic environments is presented by Abdallah et al. [4].
4.5.1
Approaches. Different kinds of heterogeneities are introduced in dynamic environments, which are usually
unknown at the initial model-building stages. Thus, it is essential for the model to work in a representation
space that can easily accommodate different sensor heterogeneities, distribution changes, and other variations.
Semantic space [201] and clustering-based representation [3, 5, 161] are popular choices for constructing such
domain-invariant representation space. Semantic space representation uses commonly present attributes related
to sensor type, data type, sensor location, attached object, activity patterns, etc., as features of the data instances.
Clustering, on the other hand, can be separately performed on different feature spaces. Then, the resultant clusters
can directly be mapped with each other to bypass the construction of an intermediate feature space. Similar to
clusters, subsequences among data instances can also be mapped based on similarity measures, provided they do
not belong to very different feature spaces [167].
After addressing the challenge of data representation, performing inference & updating the base model is
the next step. In the frameworks where clustering-based data representation is present, the inference can be
performed using active learning [3, 5], weighted graph matching [161], and cluster updation techniques [3].
An inference technique invariant of the underlying data representation scheme is to update the classifier in a
self-training framework, where a new training dataset is iteratively created based on the confident predictions
of the base model on the unseen data [53, 157]. In addition to dynamically creating training datasets, another
approach is to modify the classifier itself with a change observed in the observed setting. This can be performed
by using feature incremental random forests [89], where a novel mutual information based diversity generation
strategy is employed to select individual trees of the random forests that become ineffective with the emergence
of new sensors. To incorporate new data, steps like the creation of new trees and the update of older trees by
performing node splitting on leaves can be performed. The adaptation process can also be viewed as a learning-
to-rank problem [201], where the goal is to rank activity classes for each data instance. This can be performed by
computing a score against each activity class for each data instance using semantic attributes and maximizing
the area under curve (AUC) using stochastic gradient descent.
4.6
Distributed & Federated Learning
In wearable devices like smartwatches and smartphones, movement-based (IMU) and physiological (heart rate,
blood sugar, etc.) sensors are deployed that are capable of constantly collecting user-specific data. Hypothetically,
the collection of this data from multiple users can likely result in a large-scale dataset, on which, generalizable
HAR models can be trained. However, these data modalities are often an indicator of the user’s health, and hence,
sharing this data would violate privacy as well as security. Recently, there have been regulations put in place to
protect data privacy and security [192]. Hence, the data is now available in the form of isolated islands [42], which
makes it impossible to perform standard training of HAR models in a centralized manner. Along with the data
availability, there are additional challenges of resource constraints and personalization. Since the model training
has to be shifted onto small-scale devices, handling computational resources becomes imperative. Also, the HAR
system on each small-scale device needs to be personalized to the end user. All these challenges combined give
rise to the research area of federated/distributed transfer learning. To perform simulated experiments, datasets
like HHAR, Mobiact, and UCI Smartphone are used in the literature.
4.6.1
Approaches. A typical federated/distributed learning setup consists of a server and a client side. The goal
of the client side is to perform on-device setting-specific training, whereas, the server side is responsible for
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 23 ---
combining the client models to create a global model, which benefits the client models as they have less training
data. On the server side, the availability of computational resources is greater than on the client side, however,
the training data is not available as well. Thus, there has to be communication between both sides in terms of
sharing the model weights, classification scores, or other training-specific characteristics that do not violate any
privacy or security policies. Under these constraints, federated learning frameworks are set up.
Since the server side can afford the training of neural networks, the pretrain-then-finetune theme is explored in
the federated learning setup [42, 142]. On the server side, the first step is to pretrain the initial HAR model using
publicly available datasets. These models are shared with the clients for them to bootstrap their personal HAR
system. These models are then re-trained on the client side using small amounts of personal data. These updated
models are shared back with the server, where they are aggregated to update the global model. The updated
global model gets shared with the clients again and the entire process is repeated.
In addition to sharing the model weights, the class-wise prediction scores can also be shared between the
server and the clients [74]. The benefit of sharing class-wise probabilities is that it becomes straightforward to
use a knowledge distillation scheme on the client side, where having small-size models is a requirement. Under a
distributed learning setup, a workaround for sharing data has been explored [80], where a privacy-protecting
dataset is created on the server side. Rather than directly sharing data instances, which would violate privacy, all
clients agree to a specific matrix that gets applied to the user-selected data instances to generate an encoded data
matrix, which is shared with the server.
4.7
Performance Measurement
The standard evaluation setup in machine learning consists of 𝑘-fold cross-validation. The idea behind using it is
to avoid overfitting and potential bias in the training data. Additionally, performance indices like weighted F1
score or AUC are preferred over standard classification accuracy as they are more suitable under class imbalance
settings [128]. However, all these remedies are ineffective at measuring the performance of a HAR framework
when the train and test conditions differ drastically. In particular, measuring the overall performance of a HAR
framework based only on its performance in the source setting does not provide a complete picture of the ability
of the framework to generalize. Thus, performance measurement under transfer learning settings is crucial for
assessment and comparison purposes. The source-target dataset pairs used in performance measurement works
are shown in Table 4.
4.7.1
Approaches. The works targeting performance evaluation under transfer learning settings are very few. In a
multi-domain setup, a leave-one-dataset-out based performance measure is used for analyzing the domain-agnostic
performance of a classifier [82]. Similar to 𝑘-fold cross-validation, it performs 𝑘trials of pre-training, where
𝑘−1 datasets are used as sources and inference if performed on the remaining dataset. A more comprehensive
assessment targeted at characterizing model performance based on the robustness to differing source and target
conditions, the influence of dataset characteristics, and the feature space characteristics is performed in the
literature [78]. This large-scale assessment work focuses on seven self-supervised approaches, namely, multi-task
self-supervision, masked reconstruction, AE, CPC, SimCLR, SimSiam, and BYOL, and analyzes them from the
perspectives of the aforementioned factors on ten datasets. Another work focused on analyzing self-supervised
frameworks from the perspective of the pre-training data efficiency has proposed an index called critical mass. It
denotes the minimum amount of unlabeled data used for pre-training, which results in a recognition F1 score
within 5% of using the entire dataset.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 24 ---
Table 5. Review of the state-of-the-art works in the domain of transfer learning in smart home settings for HAR. We shortlist
those works that claim their approach to be the best-performing one by comparing it against other relevant methods in
the literature. We also filter out the then-SOTA methods, i.e., the ones that were the best-performing at the time they were
proposed but are no longer SOTA.
Reference
Year
Datasets
Tasks
Method
Compared Against
Performance
Metric
Performance
(min - max)
Sukhija &
Krishnan [181]
2019
CASAS HH
Different Tasks,
Heterogeneity
Random forests to identify pivotal features from
both domains to learn a transformation matrix
SHFR, HeMap, FA, HFA, SHFR-RF
mean error,
standard
deviation
26.49 ± 2.81 -
18.17 ± 1.68
Feuz & Cook [66]
2015
Custom
Heterogeneity,
Multi-Source
Transfer
Meta feature construction for heterogeneity and
stacking in ensembles for multiple sources
Ablations
accuracy,
recall
accuracy
∼0.5 −0.62,
recall
∼0.2 −0.3
Sanabria et al.
[173]
2021
University of
Amsterdam
Heterogeneity
Shift-GAN, a Bi-GAN variant with covariate shift
correction using KMM, for feature transfer
GFK, TCA, FLDA, JDA, IW, CCA,
ADDA, DAN, DANN, ADADM
macro F1
score
0.68 - 0.76
Ramamurthy et
al. [149]
2021
Custom,
OPPORTUNITY
Different Tasks
Pretrain-then-finetune: self-taught feature
extraction using deep belief networks
w/o self-taught learning in nearest
neighbor, SVM, RF, MLP, CNN
accuracy, F1
score
F1 score: OP-
PORTUNITY:
0.86
5
DISCUSSION
5.1
Review of the State-of-the-art
In the last two sections, we surveyed 205 works that perform transfer learning the domains of smart homes
and wearables for HAR. These works range in the span of the last 16 years, where enhancements, in both
the approaches and the performance, can be witnessed periodically. With the advent of deep learning, the
conventional transfer learning algorithms are somewhat replaced by neural network based solutions, where
advancements are being made primarily in the neural network architectures, design of loss functions, and training
frameworks. Thus, it is essential to keep track of the best-performing methods such that the community can
benefit by learning the recent trends.
For this purpose, we provide a review of the state-of-the-art (SOTA) transfer learning methods for HAR in
smart home and wearable sensing scenarios in Table 5 and Table 6, respectively. In particular, we provide the
following information about the SOTA approaches: (i) references, (ii) year, (iii) datasets used in the experiments,
(iv) challenges tackled (from Section 3 and Section 4), (v) Method(s) used to address these challenges, (vi)
methods with which the SOTA approaches are compared, (vii) performance metrics used in their results, and
(viii) performance values. To shortlist the SOTA works, we first search for articles that claim to have the best-
performing method(s) present. Then, we filter out the works that were proposed in the distant past (more than 3
years in the case of wearables literature). We do not perform this filtering in the case of smart homes because of
the lesser number of SOTA contributions. Finally, we remove the redundant entries in our collection, where clear
extensions of these works have been proposed in the literature.
Based on Table 5 and Table 6, we draw the following conclusions: (i) The domain of transfer learning for HAR
in smart homes has significantly less number of works that compare their proposed method with other relevant
SOTA methods, (ii) Around 73% (19 out of 26) of the SOTA methods rely on deep learning based frameworks, (iii)
Commonly found themes in the SOTA deep learning based frameworks are pretrain-then-finetune, architectures
based on AE, CNN, GRU/LSTSM, GAN, and attention modules, loss functions based on MMD and domain
discrimination loss, training frameworks like self-supervised learning, disentangled learning, and adversarial
learning, (iv) Commonly found themes in the SOTA conventional approaches are data representation using
meta features, clustering approaches, and subsequences, label propagation using optimal transport and graph
matching, (v) Unless explicitly performed, a direct comparison of these SOTA methods is not possible owing to a
variation in the experimental settings in terms of the datasets, challenges addressed, and performance metrics.
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information

--- PAGE 25 ---
Table 6. Review of the state-of-the-art works in the domain of transfer learning in wearables for HAR. We observe a significant
number of works claiming their approach to be the SOTA. Hence, we first select only those approaches that were proposed
in the last three years, i.e., from 2021 to 2023. Similar to the case of smart homes, we filter out the then-SOTA methods.
Reference
Year
Datasets
Tasks
Method
Compared Against
Performance
Metric
Notable
Performance
Gong et al. [72]
2022
Custom
Personalization
Model agnostic meta learning: different HAR
tasks constructed by sampling data across
activities and subjects
Transfer with CNN, Prototype
Networks, MAML
average accuracy,
AUC
accuracy
∼0.8 −0.91, AUC
0.98
Suh et al. [178]
2022
OPPORTUNITY,
PAMAP2,
MHEALTH,
MoCapci
Personalization
Training of AE based on MMD and adversarial
subject-classification loss
Multi-channel CNN,
DeepConvLSTM, Transformers,
METIER
accuracy,
weighted &
macro F1 score
macro F1 score:
MHEALTH
96.47 ± 4.04,
PAMAP2
77.84 ± 11.69
Presotto et al.
[143]
2023
HHAR, MobiAct,
PAMAP2,
RealWorld,
MotionSense, UCI
d-Heterogeneity
multi-dataset training in leave-one-dataset-out
manner
Inception-ResNet, DeepConvLSTM,
HART, MobileHART architectures
average F1 score
Inception-ResNet:
PAMAP2: 0.76,
MotionSense: 0.97
Sanabria et al.
[172]
2021
PAMAP2, DSADS,
WISDOM
p-Heterogeneity,
Personalization
Bi-GAN for feature alignment and contrastive
learning
TCA, GFK, DAN, DANN, JAN,
DeepCORAL, ADADM
micro & macro F1
score
macro F1 score:
PAMAP2: 0.76,
DSADS: 0.84
Lu et al. [122]
2021
DSADS, UCI-HAR,
USC-HAD,
PAMAP2
p-Heterogeneity
mapping between substructures of data using
optimal transport method
nearest neighbor, TCA, SA,
CORAL, STL, OT
accuracy
PAMAP: 0.74,
DSADS: 0.81
Khan & Roy
[102]
2022
OPPORTUNITY,
WISDOM, DAS
Different Tasks
AE trained using cross-entropy and MMD loss
UnTran, JDA, TCA
accuracy
WISDM: 0.89, DAS:
0.89
Zhu et al. [221]
2023
PAMAP2, DSADS,
SHL
p-Heterogeneity
source domain selection: MMD-based distances,
feature transfer: multi-head attention, local MMD
loss, domain confusion & classification loss
TCA, JAN, TNNAR, DANN,
SymNet, UDA-FM
accuracy,
macro-F1 score
macro-F1 score:
PAMAP2: 0.42,
DSADS: 0.73
Alajaji et al. [9]
2023
Custom
p-Heterogeneity
CNN & soft attention module trained with
domain alignment, triplet, and classification loss
CORAL, DNN, HDCNN
accuracy,
micro-F1 score
micro-F1 score:
0.54
Hussein & Hajj
[95]
2022
PAR, HHAR
d-Heterogeneity,
Personalization
soft parameter sharing & squared MMD loss
Hard & soft parameter sharing,
linear & non-linear relations, DC &
MMD loss
average F1 score
HHAR: 0.84
Soleimani et al.
[175]
2022
PAMAP2,
OPPORTUNITY,
LISSI
Personalization
Synthetic data generation: CNN-based GAN with
micro-mini batch training strategy
STL, GFK, SA-GAN, DANN, VADA,
IIMT
weighted-F1
score
PAMAP2: 0.76,
OPPORTUNITY:
0.54
Varshney et al.
[190]
2021
mHealth, PAMAP2
p-Heterogeneity
pretrain-then-finetune: CNN backbone
PerceptionNet, DeepConvLSTM,
Stochastic Generative Network
accuracy
PAMAP2: 0.94,
mHealth: 0.98
Qian et al. [144]
2021
UCI-HAR, UniMiB,
OPPORTUNITY
Personalization
disentangled feature learning using VAE with
independent excitation mechanism
DDNN, DeepConvLSTM, CoDATS,
VAE, DIVA
F1 score
UniMiB: 0.88,
OPPORTUNITY:
0.81
Zhao et al. [215]
2021
DSADS, PAMAP2
p-Heterogeneity,
Personalization
cluster-to-cluster transfer using MMD between
clusters
Nearest Neighbor, SVM, RF, PCA,
TCA, SA, STL
accuracy, F1
score
PAMAP F1 score:
p-Heterogeneity:
0.72,
Personalization:
0.4
Alinia et al. [15]
2023
PAMAP2, DAS,
Smartsock
p,m-
Heterogeneity
combinatorial optimization: dependency graph
with min-cost mapping
ConvLSTM, DirectMap
F1 score, NMI,
Purity
PAMAP2 F1 score:
m-heterogeneity:
0.59,
p-heterogeneity:
0.7
Fallahzadeh et al.
[60]
2023
DSADS, PAMAP2,
Smartsock
Personalization
Similarity network based clustering followed by
bipartite mapping
CvC, CvR, RF, Bagging, ActiLabel
accuracy
PAMAP2: ∼0.74,
DSADS: ∼0.72
Lu et al. [123]
2022
SHAR, DSADS,
UCIHAR,
PAMAP2,
USCHAD
p-Heterogeneity,
Personalization
Semantically aware augmentations and large
margin loss for feature transfer
DANN, CORAL, ANDMask,
GroupDRO, RSC, GILE
accuracy,
standard error
PAMAP2: 0.81,
DSADS: 0.91
Faridee et al. [63]
2021
PAMAP2,
OPPORTUNITY,
HHAR
p-Heterogeneity,
Personalization
spatial transformer with domain discrimination
loss
STL, MADA, DGDA, SA-GAN
average F1 score
PAMAP2
p-Heterogeneity:
0.61,
Personalization:
0.7
Hu et al. [93]
2023
SBHAR,
OPPORTUNITY,
RealWorld
Personalization
Instance weighting based on classification loss,
domain discrimination loss, and
meta-classification loss
HDCNN, MMD, dan, AdvSKM,
MCD, XHAR, DANN, DUA, ETN,
TCL, UAN, SS-UniDA, PADA
accuracy, macro
F1 score
macro F1 score:
OPPORTUNITY:
0.58, RealWorld:
0.74
Suh et al. [179]
2022
OPPORTUNITY,
PAMAP2,
MHealth, RealDisp
Multi-Source
pretrain-then-finetune: backbone with spatial
attention block trained using MMD, domain
discrimination, and self-knowledge distillation
loss
MC-CNN, DeepConvLSTM,
Self-Attention, METIER,
Adversarial CNN
accuracy,
weighted &
macro F1 score
macro F1 score:
PAMAP2: 0.75,
OPPORTUNITY:
0.77
Pavliuk et al.
[137]
2023
KU-HAR,
UCI-HAPT
d-Heterogeneity
pretrain-then-finetune: pre-trained CNN on
scalogram generated using CWT
handcrafted, FFT, CNN-GRU,
Wavelet Packet Transform based
features
accuracy, F1
score
F1 score KU-HAR:
0.97
Haresamudram
et al. [79]
2023
HHAR, Myogym,
Mobiact,
Motionsense,
MHEALTH,
PAMAP2
p-Heterogeneity,
Different Tasks
Self-supervised learning: Enhanced CPC with
modifications in encoder architecture,
autoregressive network, and future prediction
task
CNN, GRU, DeepConvLSTM,
Multi-task SSL, AE, SimCLR, CPC
macro F1 score
HHAR: 0.59,
MotionSense: 0.89,
MHEALTH: 0.53
Leng et al. [114]
2023
PAMAP2,
RealWorld,
USC-HAD
m-Heterogeneity
Synthetic IMU data generation using LLMs and
CLIP based pre-trained models
Classification setup with real IMU
data
macro F1 score
PAMAP2: 0.69,
RealWorld: 0.77,
USC-HAD: 0.48
This manuscript is under review. Please write to sourish.dhekane@gatech.edu for up-to-date information


[... truncated at page 25 of 40 ...]
